Gulf Area
Subregional programme document
2014-2017

The Gulf Area subregional programme for the Kingdom of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates (E/ICEF/2013/P/L.17) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2013 second
regular session (3-6 September 2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 February 2014.

Qatar

Saudi
Arabia

United
Arab
Emirates

0.4/0.4

0.2/0.1

5.1/4.9

0.8/0.7

Basic data†
(2011 unless otherwise indicated)

Bahrain

Kuwait

Child population
(millions, under 18 years, male/female)

0.2/0.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

10

11

8

9

7

Underweight (%, moderate & severe)

–

–

–

–

–

(%, male/female, urban/rural,
poorest/richest)

–

–

–

–

–

Maternal mortality ratio
(per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

20*

14*

7*

24*

12*

Use of improved drinking water sources
(%, 2010)

100

99

100

97

100

Use of improved sanitation facilities
(%, 2010)

99

100

100

100

98

One year olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

99

99

93

98

94

One year olds immunized against measles (%)

99

99

99

98

94

Primary school enrolment
(%, net male/female)

99/100
(2006)

97/100
(2008)

95/95

90/89
(2009)

94/98
(2006)

Survival rate to last primary grade
(%, male/female)

97/98
(2010)

96/96
(2009)

91/97
(2007)

–

85/84
(2010)

Adult HIV prevalence rate
(%, 15-49 years, male/female)

–

–

–

–

–

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)

–

–

–

–

–

6/3
(2000)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

15 920
(2010)

48 900
(2010)

80 440

17 820

40 760

Child labour
(%, 5-14 years, male/female)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age)
(%, male/female, urban/rural,
poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

† More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org.
* The figures reported in the above table are the adjusted estimates prepared by the Maternal
Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. The reported estimate of the maternal mortality
ratio at the country level for the United Arab Emirates is 0 deaths per 100,000 live births
(2007), as presented by the United Arab Emirates National Bureau of Statistics, 2011.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The combined population of the five Gulf States is almost 42 million. In 2011,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia had the largest population size, 28 million; followed by
the United Arab Emirates, 7.9 million; Kuwait, 2.8 million; Qatar, 1.9 million; and
Bahrain, 1.3 million. 1 Adolescents aged 10-19 represent 8 per cent of the population
in Qatar, 14 per cent in Kuwait and 12 per cent in Bahrain. 2 Populations in the five
__________________
1
2

2

World Bank data available on http://data.worldbank.org/country.
Ibid.

countries include large numbers of expatriate workers attracted by local employment
opportunities; estimates of the proportion of expatriate workers range from 31 per
cent in Saudi Arabia (Central Department of Statistics and Information, 2010), to 68
per cent in Kuwait (Central Statistics Bureau, 2011), to 89 per cent in the United Arab
Emirates (National Bureau of Statistics, 2010).
2.
The five Gulf States covered by the Gulf Area subregional programme represent
important political power and influence in the Middle East and among Islamic States.
They have demonstrated commendable philanthropic commitments, in -country and
for less developed countries. Annual allocations of over $5 billion of development
and humanitarian official development assistance (ODA) have placed them as a group
at the top of the list of donors who are not part of the Development Assistance
Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). From 1973 to 2008, Arab ODA stood at about 1.5 per cent of gross national
income on average, double the 0.7 per cent United Nations target set for OECD
members. Saudi Arabia is the largest Arab provider of ODA, with a record $5 billion
ODA allocation in 2008, and over $3 billion in 2009. The United Arab Emirates
donated $1 billion, and Kuwait $528 million, in 2009.
3.
All five States have made significant advances in improving children ’s health
and survival and their access to education, having achieved relevant Millennium
Development Goals, and are on track to meet others. In education, in general, the Gulf
countries achieved major improvements in net enrolment rates. In Saudi Arabia, this
rate was 97 per cent for both males and females in 2011, bringing the gender parity
index to 1. 3 In Qatar in 2010, the net enrolment rate in primary school stood at 92.6
per cent, with girls registering a higher rate (94 per cent) than boys (91.2 per cent);
the gender parity index reached 1.03. 4 The youth (15-24) literacy rate reached 100
per cent in Bahrain for both males and females, and 96.8 per cent in Qatar with
females
registering
a
higher
rate
(98.3
per
cent)
than
males
(96.3 per cent) in 2010. 5
4.
Although the National Development Plans are calling for comprehensive and
integrated programmes in early childhood development (ECD), enrolment in ECD
institutions is low due to affordability and accessibility issues, and this has led to low
school readiness. Despite the quantitative gains in school enrolment for both girls and
boys, concerns exist about the quality of education and learning achievements.
According to results from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
2011, none of the participating Gulf countries reached the international achievement
benchmark level of 500 in math or science, with Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates all scoring between 394 and 465.
5.
The under-five mortality rate and the infant mortality rate have decreased in
these countries, which are on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goal on
child mortality. Nevertheless, disparities remain at the subnational level (for example,
in the United Arab Emirates, the under-five mortality rate is 10.5 deaths per 1,000
live births in Abu Dhabi, while it is 6.5 in Ajman).The maternal mortality ratio is low
in these five countries, varying between 8 deaths per 100,000 live births in Qatar and
24 per 100,000 live births in Saudi Arabia. While considerable progress has been
__________________
3

4
5

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Statistics
(http://stats.uis.unesco.org).
Qatar Statistics Authority online (www.qsa.gov.qa).
UNESCO Statistics, op cit.

3

made in reducing child mortality, these countries are experiencing emerging health
issues such as child obesity and non-communicable diseases such as diabetes.
6.
With regard to adolescents, national strategies are still at an early stag e of
development. There is a need to channel the momentum and energies of adolescents
and youth, both male and female, in a positive direction and to prepare them for future
leadership roles.
7.
Across the region, women’s low political and economic participation is
underpinned by gender inequality. Although the Gulf countries have made
investments in increasing women’s education levels in the last decades, and the
tertiary education enrolment rates for women are higher than those of men, the
countries have not been as successful at integrating women into economic activities
in order to reap the benefits of this investment.
8.
The Gulf States are party to several human rights instruments, with reservations
made on some of the articles. While commending the significant achievements of
these States in diverse fields, the Concluding Observations of the United Nations
Committee on the Rights of the Child recommend further action to harmonize
domestic laws, especially those related to protection, with the provisio ns of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and other ratified human rights treaties. The
issues include: low minimum legal ages of criminal responsibility and marriage of
girls (which is also an issue raised by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women); absence of updated juvenile justice laws; inadequate
skills of personnel dealing with children in conflict with the law; and the lack of
reliable statistics on violence against children, those affected by disabilities, and
domestic violence. The Committee also called for development of multi -sectoral
strategies to optimize access to quality ECD options within homes and preschools.
9.
The relative shortage of child-related disaggregated data, especially protectionrelated, including at subnational levels and according to age groups, sex, wealth
quintiles, etc., raises concerns about the optimal equity of developmental social
services. Database systems in most Gulf countries need strengthening for
identification of any remaining pockets of in-country disparity and vulnerability, and
for facilitating evidence-based policy advocacy for rights-based legislative and policy
planning processes. Findings need to be more widely accessible to assist regular
monitoring of the situation of children. The strengthening and gender-sensitization of
institutional and human capacities will help to ensure the maximum equity and long term sustainability of child development initiatives.
10. Fairly “wide and deep formal social safety nets are in place pro viding special
support for widows, divorced, sick, elderly, unmarried and unemployed young
women, students and families of prisoners, though it is not clear if this reaches those
most in need.” 6 In some of the Gulf countries, State-supported social protection
systems cover some non-citizens, including migrants and refugees — often among the
poorest and most vulnerable. It is important for the Governments in the Gulf Area to
review the existing social welfare structures to ensure that systems are child-sensitive
and aiming to reach the most disadvantaged.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2010-2013
__________________
6

4

UNDP, 2009.

Key results achieved
11. UNICEF contributed to an improved knowledge base in the region through
support to child-focused research and providing technical advice to National
Childhood Commissions and other partners in Gulf countries. With UNICEF support,
the Childhood councils/commissions and other relevant institutions prepared equityfocused analytical studies on the situation of children, especially the most vulnerable
(Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates). Consultations with
national and subnational partners, girls and boys of diverse backgrounds, including
those of various vulnerable groups, enriched the situation analysis. UNICEF
supported Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates in using the results of the analytical
studies on children to develop national childhood policies/strategies that identify and
target vulnerable groups of children. The 2012 Multiple Indica tor Cluster Survey in
Qatar generated new data on children and women and contributed to piloting the PDA
(Personal Digital Assistant)-based survey globally. A Partnership Assessment exercise
led to a comprehensive Gulf-wide Advocacy Strategy and country-level action plans
identifying additional potential partners and donor institutions, also recommending
audience-specific communication guidelines and tools.
12. The UNICEF Gulf Area Office supported the Supreme Council for Motherhood
and Childhood and the General Women’s Union in the United Arab Emirates to assess
the gaps in child protection systems and capacities across all social sectors —
especially social welfare, education, health, security, and justice. In order to widen
access to adequately staffed services, facilities and information at school level,
UNICEF and the National Childhood Committee in Saudi Arabia developed the
capacity of schools for early detection and response to child abuse cases through the
training of 45 trainers.
13. UNICEF has been addressing several healthy lifestyle issues in the United Arab
Emirates. UNICEF and partners reached 34,000 adolescents, their parents and school
staff with information that led to an increased awareness on healthy lifestyles (obesity,
injury and HIV/AIDS prevention). Key outcomes of UNICEF advocacy efforts to
reduce childhood obesity in that country included a law banning the sale of
unhealthful items in school canteens; the establishment of a School Health Committee
by the Ministry of Health to monitor children’s health and guide the institution of
remedial measures; and incorporation of health education sessions as a mandatory
component of the new school curriculum. As a result of the success and visibility of
these joint initiatives, a number of partners are replicating projects to address obesity
and injury prevention among children and adolescents, reaching all children aged 1215 years enrolled in public schools.
14. The Gulf countries are important global partners for UNICEF and others
committed to child survival and education. They have demonstrated their leadership
in international causes, such as Educate a Child (Qatar), the New Vaccine Initiative
(Saudi Arabia), and humanitarian response in the Syrian Arab Republic and
neighbouring countries (for example, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates all made significant humanitarian contributions to the United Nations and
bilaterally). Key partnerships were established with governments and national and
regional foundations/charities, and support garnered for government-led public
appeals. In addition, partnerships with private corporations and High Net Worth
Individuals were initiated to support the work of UNICEF locally and globally

5

through either in-kind or monetary donations via cause-related marketing campaigns
and corporate donations.
15. The first-ever United Nations Common Country Strategic Frameworks for Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates were prepared by the United Nations country
teams (UNCTs)and some non-resident agencies. These are leading to a stronger
collective voice for human rights promotion and protection. Based on situation
reviews of challenges and opportunities, each strategic framework identified common
priorities for the United Nations agencies in support of nationa l programmes. Major
priorities focused on the rights of children and women.
Lessons learned
16. The data generated in the current APD has helped to demonstrate that despite
achievement of results and targets at the national level, attention should shif t to
subnational vulnerabilities by developing and implementing national strategies for
targeted action at decentralized levels to reach the most vulnerable children.
17. High-profile and replicable in-country interventions for children that rely on
cutting-edge technical inputs add value to country programmes and to resource
mobilization for regional and global projects. The importance of regular contact with
national partners, and in-country programmes for children, became evident from
substantive funding by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, and their
increased adoption of new child-focused initiatives.
18. The Gulf is not a homogenous subregion, and some Gulf donors have developed
their own capacity for implementation. This means that UNICEF must demonstrate
its unique value added for achieving results for children. It must do this by virtue of
its inter-governmental character, its universal normative mandate for children’s rights,
its extensive presence and its technical capacity, especially in its role as advocate,
convener, knowledge broker and critical partner of choice to Governments, civil
society and other stakeholders. Work in the Gulf Area requires donor visibility and
acknowledgement, adequate investment in time and resources in order to gain the trust
of government and other partners, and a ‘one UNICEF’ approach across the subregion.

6

The area programme, 2014-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Other resources
Programme components

Saudi United Arab
Arabia
Emirates

Bahrain

Kuwait

Qatar

Sustained partnerships for child
rights in the Gulf and globally

338

50

200

150

150

888

Knowledge and evidence on
children

440

728

578

2 183

2 183

6 112

Cross-sectoral

222

222

222

667

667

2 000

1 000

1 000

1 000

3 000

3000

9 000

Total

Total

Preparation process
19. Consultative meetings were held with technical counterparts and the Ministries
of Foreign Affairs of the five countries in the Gulf Area. Programme preparation was
informed by the National Development Plans of the five countries in addition to the
Common Country Strategic Frameworks for Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates.
20. Programme preparation was also informed by the findings of the Situation
Analysis of Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, the Qatar Multiple Indicator
Cluster Surveys, concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, the annual reports of the Gulf Area Office of UNICEF and of other United
Nations agencies, as well as strategy formulation exercises. The exercises brought
together a large number of partners — including national coordinating bodies, sectoral
ministries, subnational institutions and civil society organizations. These exercises
added to the results of the consultations with children and adolescents. An important
input was the UNICEF Gulf Area Office Partnership Assessment.
Programme components, results and strategies
21. The overall goal of the 2014-2017 APD is to work in partnership with
Governments and other partners in the Gulf Area to progressively realize the rights of
girls, boys and adolescents to development, protection and participation, with a focus
on the most disadvantaged. Unlike most other UNICEF area/country programme
documents, the present APD has both an in-country and global partnership dimension.
Thus, the efforts of the Gulf Area Office will be geared towards transforming the
strong political will of the Gulf States (as reflected in the National Development Plans
and Strategies) into concrete positive and equitable in-country changes aiming at
improving the status of the rights of girls and boys through legislative, policy and
strategic actions. In addition, the APD has as a major aim to leverage partnerships and
mobilize political support and resources with Gulf countries in order to improve
children’s lives globally.
22. Proposed programme components include: (a) Sustained partnerships for child
rights in the Gulf and globally; and (b) Knowledge and evidence on children.

7

23. Key results expected by 2017 are: (a) Government, private sector and other
partners in the Gulf Area demonstrate increased resources for and commitment to
child rights in the Gulf region and globally; (b) national capacities for systematic
generation and analysis of data and knowledge on the situation of child rights are
strengthened; and (c) timely and quality evidence on the situation of children is used
to inform national policy dialogue and systems reform.
24. Strategies cutting across all components will include: capacity developme nt for
systems strengthening; evidence-based policy development; knowledge management;
advocacy and communication; strategic partnership -building with diverse
stakeholders; and identification and promotion of effective innovations. Strategies to
promote gender equality and equity will be integrated across all programme
components. Within the overall programme components, the APD must be uniquely
flexible and responsive to take the different country specificities into consideration
and to be able to seize unforeseen opportunities to advance new partnerships and
alliances for children.

Programme components
Sustained partnerships for child rights in the Gulf and globally
25. The Gulf States have demonstrated commitment to engaging on important
global issues. This interest has been manifested in various forms, especially internally
through the establishment of foundations supporting a number of causes, and globally
through the roll-out of philanthropic efforts and through their contributions to official
development assistance. Building on the strong commitment of Governments and
partners to children, UNICEF will engage and mobilize partners and resources in the
Gulf Area to realize child rights. It is expected that these partnerships will lead to
increased capacities and more resources being made available in the region and
globally to achieve results for girls and boys. UNICEF will work with each of the five
Gulf countries to mobilize and channel its particular commitment and resources in
support of their specific priorities. For example, education is a global priority for
Qatar, while polio eradication is a priority of Saudi Arabia. New partnerships with
other regional and global partners, such as ‘think tanks’, academia and the private
sector, will be forged to generate knowledge and explore innovative approaches to
programming. UNICEF will leverage its global network to generate and share good
practices and knowledge and to provide an opportunity for regional partners to
interface on programmatic and policy issues with partners across regions. SouthSouth cooperation opportunities, advocacy and strategic communication will be key
strategies for this programme component.
Knowledge and evidence on children
26. Under this programme component, UNICEF will support Gulf countries to be
better equipped with tools and methods to improve their capacity for data analysis, as
well as the generation of quality data to understand the scope and the patterns of
inequalities more systematically, including in the area of child protection. This equityfocused data and analysis can then be used to provide the foundation for more
evidence-based policy development. Equity tools and frameworks will be used at
national and subnational levels to identify barriers and bottlenecks and monitor
progress in overcoming them. UNICEF will support government and other partners

8

to develop a national set of child rights indicators based on international norms related
to children’s rights. UNICEF will explore the establishment of Centres of Excellence
in the subregion, in order to promote best practices, innovation and cutting -edge
research in selected areas of children’s rights.
27. UNICEF and its global network have strong potential to bring added value to
policy formulation and systems reform in diverse areas. Three areas have been
identified based on discussions with government partners. However, the APD is a
flexible, demand-driven partnership framework, which can include other priority
areas for support to knowledge generation as they arise. First, in social protection,
UNICEF, in partnership with other United Nations agencies, will support interested
Governments in having an ongoing and updated analysis of social protection
mechanisms, in order make these mechanisms more sensitive or responsive to the
most at-risk children and their families. At the same time, innovative strategies will
create synergy between systems for social protection and child protection to improve
protection for all children. Second, given the prominence of early childhood
development in various National Development Plans, UNICEF will work with
interested Governments to generate evidence to inform policy and programming for
the provision of integrated early childhood development in their countries. Third, to
promote adolescent development, the UNICEF Gulf Area Office will support the
generation of knowledge and the sharing of global best practices to develop an
effective life-skills programme. This programme will aim to increase opportunities
for the participation of adolescents and increase their awareness of the benefits of
adopting a healthy lifestyle. It will also enhance their ability to make healthier choices
(for prevention of obesity, injury and HIV/AIDS) and resist pressures to adopt
harmful or risky behaviours. At the same time it will improve their conflict resolution
skills. Social media and mobile technology will promote interactive learning.
28. The cross-sectoral programme component includes costs related to the effective
and efficient implementation of the country programme, including salaries for staff
performing cross-cutting functions.
Relationship to national priorities
29. The programme components are aligned with the Gulf States National
Development Plans, several of which prioritize the following issues: improved quality
of life for all children, focusing on those most in need and using a holistic approach
encompassing child well-being and protection; transiting from social welfare to social
development; balanced regional development; promotion of healthy lifestyles
particularly through schools and media campaigns; establishing comprehensive
domestic violence protection systems and mechanisms for early detection of violence
against children and neglect; and equipping youth with skills for effective
participation and responsible citizenship to prepare them for leadership roles. Some
National Development Plans aim to improve legislation, strengthen institutions and
human resources, and enhance Corporate Social Responsibility. All these are in l ine
with the proposed programme approaches of UNICEF, and are also included in the
Common Country Strategic Frameworks for Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates.
30. The APD will support the Gulf States objectives of building social cohesion and
equitable geographical distribution of development opportunities as well as
promoting social responsibility. By generating evidence to inform policy reform, the

9

APD will contribute to: disparity reduction between geographical areas and societal
groups; helping service systems to transition from social welfare to social
development; and formulation of policies/ strategies to reach vulnerable children.
Relationship to international priorities
31. The programme seeks to support national responses under commitme nts made
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and in State Party reports to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and other human rights treaties and
development agendas. The APD is designed to support the efforts of Governments in
the Gulf Area to respond to and progressively implement the recommendations from
the committees for the two conventions noted above. Its initiatives will be
implemented within the overall framework of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017.
Policy advocacy will promote actualization of national obligations under the post 2015 agenda. The programme component on partnerships represents the important
contribution these countries can make to advancing international priorities, including
unfinished agendas for child survival, education and protection.
Major partnerships
32. Partnership-building is one of the two pillars of this APD. National coordinating
bodies for programme implementation will be the National Commissions for
Childhood in Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, the Supreme Councils for Family Affairs in
Kuwait and Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates Supreme Council for Motherhood
and Childhood and the General Women’s Union. Child-focused relationships with
civil society organizations, academia, media and the private sector will be expanded,
and in the process, innovative ways of working and achieving results will be
proactively explored. Partnerships will be built with national and regional i nstitutions
and other key stakeholders to push forward the agenda for children, leveraging the
political will of the five countries.
33. Collaboration with United Nations agencies will be ensured to realize the
common vision of the Common Country Strategic Frameworks in Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates, in addition to common concerns in the other three
countries. Governments will be engaged in dialogue to adapt their United Nations
collaboration according to changing global development trends as su ggested by the
United Nations 2012 quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development of the United Nations system. In Bahrain, the UNCT will
support the Government in meeting the recommendations of the Bahrain Independent
Commission of Inquiry. UNICEF will lead on social cohesion and reconciliation. In
Saudi Arabia, the UNCT will jointly submit a report on the human rights situation in
the country as part of the Universal Periodic Review process. The United Nations
Development Programme and UNICEF will submit a joint proposal to the United
Nations Development Group on country-level catalytic initiatives on human rights
mainstreaming in Saudi Arabia.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
34. Country-specific annual or biannual rolling plans will be developed with
relevant partners/line Ministries. Joint monitoring and field visits will be incorporated
as part of the joint integrated monitoring and evaluation plan. All monitoring will be

10

informed by a focus on equity. Programme coordination will be facilitated through
technical support to the National Commissions for Childhood in Bahrain and Saudi
Arabia, the Kuwait Supreme Council for Family Affairs, the Qatar Supreme Council
for Family Affairs, Supreme Council for Motherhood and Childhood, and the General
Women’s Union in the United Arab Emirates.
35. Annual Programme Reviews and field visits will be organized with
implementing partners and periodic assessment and/or surveys undertaken. A midterm
review of the programme will be conducted in 2015. UNCT-Partner Annual and
Midterm Reviews are built into the Common Country Strategic Frameworks.
Documentation and wide dissemination of information on achievements, lessons
learned, best practices and constraints encountered will help to promote the adoption
of positive and innovative approaches, and inform the design of future APDs and
Common Country Strategic Frameworks. Given the importance and scope of
partnerships in the region, a partnership survey will be conducted in tandem with the
midterm review.

11

