Afghanistan
Country programme document
2015-2019

The draft country programme document for Afghanistan
(E/ICEF/2014/P/L.9) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2014 annual session (3-6 June
2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data †
(2012 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight

(%, under 5 years of age, moderate & severe, 2004)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

8.3/7.8
99
33
33/33, ../.., ../..
460 a

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2011)

61

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2011)

28

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

71 b

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

68 b

Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2010-2011)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2010-2011)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years, male/female)
HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female, 2010-2011)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2010-2011)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$, 2011)
†

a

b

63/46
85/84
<0.1/<0.1
..
11/10
37
38/37, 60/33, 31/58
570

More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org/.
The figure reported in the above table is the adjusted maternal mortality ratio estimate
prepared by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. The reported estimate at
the country level is 327 deaths per 100,000 live births (2010), as presented in in the
Demographic and Health Survey, 2010.
The immunization figures reported in the above table are inter-agency estimates prepared by
WHO/UNICEF. The data disaggregated by sex are as follows: DPT3 male (42%) and female
(39%); measles male (56%) and female (55%) from the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey,
2010-2011.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Over the past decade, Afghanistan has made good progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, especially Goals 2, 4, 5 and 7. Between 2007
and 2013, its Human Development Index ranking improved from the bottom fifth to
the bottom thirteenth position. Between 2001 and 2012, life expectancy improved
from 45.3 to 49.1 years; mean years of schooling increased from 2.1 to 3.1; and
purchasing power parity increased from $435 to $1,000. 1 Between 1990 and 2012 the
maternal mortality ratio decreased from 1,300 to 460 per 100,000 live births; while
under-five mortality rate was reduced from 192 to 99 per 1,000 live births. Neonatal
deaths account for approximately half of infant deaths.
2.
Progress in the social sectors, however, has been slow and has not benefited
everyone equally. Child and maternal deaths, and stunting among children remain
among the highest in the world, with very wide geographic and gender inequities.
__________________
1

2/12

UNDP, Human Development Report 2013.

Poor health indicators are associated with low access to health care for mothers and
children: over 50 per cent of deliveries take place outside health facilities, and
47 per cent of pregnant women do not access ante-natal care services. Seventy per
cent of children aged 12 to 23 months are not fully immunized, disparities exist
between boys and girls, urban and rural areas and by region. 2 Afghanistan remains an
endemic polio country despite recent progress. Water-borne diseases such as
diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections are the biggest killers of children under
five. Child malnutrition, is a significant contributor to child mortality. Nearly 54 per
cent children are moderately or severely stunted. 3 About 40 per cent of the population
(15 per cent urban, 47 per cent rural) is not using improved water sources. Only 28
per cent of the population uses an improved sanitation facility, while 21 per cent of
the
rural
population
practices
open
defecation,
down
from
32 per cent in 2000.
3.
Despite an increase in girls’ education, significant disparities remain, with girls
lagging behind boys. For every 100 urban boys only 78 urban girls attend school; in
rural areas it is 50 girls to 100 boys. General access to education in rural areas remains
a challenge as does the quality of learning outcomes and late enrolment. Around 75
per cent of the 3.5 million out-of-school children are girls. Working children, children
living with disabilities and children affected by conflict are often denied their right to
education. Child labour is high, with one in four Afghan children involved in
exploitive labour. 4
4.
Harmful social norms are widespread. Fifteen per cent of girls marry before age
of 15, and 1 in 10 women give birth before age 18. 5 There are serious concerns of
violence and exploitation of children, including sexual abuse of girls and young boys
and exchange of girls for dispute settlement between families known as “baad.”
Domestic violence, corporal punishment and harassment are prevalent. Patriarchal
societal norms weaken women’s and children’s participation in family and community
decision-making, especially among adolescent girls. This reduces the ability of
women and children to demand fulfilment of their rights to education, health, and
protection, and affects the role of duty-bearers in fulfilling these rights.
5.
Ongoing armed conflict continues to negatively impact on fundamental rights
of children. As of January 2014, more than 600,000 people were internally displaced
as a result of conflict, an increase of about 90,000 from the previous year. Attacks on
schools and health facilities, some 1,239 since 2010, have hindered access to
education and health services. Between January 2009 and August 2013, around 8,500
grave child rights violations were reported, including 6,058 c onflict-related child
deaths and injuries. Some 440 cases of recruitment by parties to the conflict, detention
of 500 children in Juvenile Rehabilitation Centres and 136 major conflict -related
incidents of abduction occurred. Children are reportedly used i n suicide attacks and
in manufacturing and planting of improvised explosive devices, and as spies. Poor
security situation, with attacks against aid workers, convoys and facilities, seriously
hampers humanitarian and development efforts.
6.
Poverty and vulnerability to poverty are persistent and widespread. Between
2007-2008 and 2011-2012 the poverty rate remained unchanged (36 per cent).
__________________
2
3
4
5

Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2010-2011.
National Nutrition Survey 2004.
MICS 2010-2011.
MICS 2010-2011.

3/12

Recurrent natural disasters have caused loss of life and, in 2013, disrupted the lives
and livelihoods of approximately 235,000 people. Families remain extremely
vulnerable to flooding and drought that devastate agriculture, pushing them further
into poverty. The poorest families experience the highest levels of deprivations. A
lack of adequate social protection systems exposes families to risks, limiting their
ability to cope with recurrent shocks.
7.
Structural challenges, including weak governance, centralized decision -making,
poor national-subnational coordination, insufficient resource allocation and
underspending of allocated budgets are major underlying challenges that slow overall
progress in access, coverage, and quality of basic services.
8.
Thanks to the efforts of the Government and its partners, basic social services
are now reaching more people than a decade ago. However, emphasis has been more
on quantity over quality and on easy-to-reach areas. Finding qualified personnel is
difficult due to conflict, migration and limited education opportunities. Gender
equality is often limited by facilities and services that are not sufficiently child- and
gender-sensitive. This is exacerbated by an inadequate number and distribution of
qualified, professional and technical staff, especially female, across sectors. Low
literacy among adult women (12 per cent) worsens the availability of female
professionals. Slow procurement and distribution of supplies, such as teaching and
learning materials, life-saving medicines, and vaccinations, has hindered quality
delivery of services. In addition, capacity-building of service providers is fragmented
and content is not harmonized among organizations that build capacity.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2010-2014
Key results achieved
9.
The 2010-2014 country programme contributed to national goals defined in the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF). Based on an analysis of child deprivation during
the midterm review (MTR), UNICEF shifted its programming and investments to the
most deprived provinces and hard-to-reach areas.
10. Remarkable improvements were made in access to basic quality education in
partnership with the Ministry of Education and stakeholders from the education
sector. Enrolment in basic education rose fro m 7.3 million in 2010 to 8.6 million in
2012. However, girls’ enrolment in primary education rose by just 1 per cent, from 40
to 41 per cent between 2010 and 2012. Gains in enrolment resulted from various
strategies, including strengthening the availabilit y of community-based schools
(CBS), accelerated learning centres (ALC) and child -friendly learning environments.
Over 560,000 out-of-school children (39 per cent girls) were enrolled with UNICEF
support through CBS and ALC as well as the construction of ne w schools. Teacher
capacity to employ learner-centric methods was enhanced through pre-service and inservice training.
11. Routine immunization, newborn care, and malnutrition interventions were
scaled up through partnership with the Ministry of Public He alth addressing critical
supply and quality bottlenecks that cause maternal and child deaths. Significant
improvements were seen in the Expanded Programme on Immunization, reproductive

4/12

health, nutrition and child health policy environment. The capacity of service
providers improved in remote areas through community outreach programmes.
Notable results were achieved in increasing measles and tetanus toxoid coverage and
reducing the spread of polio virus throughout the country through vaccination. Polio
cases fell to 14 in 2013 compared to 80 in 2011. Emergency nutrition services treated
134,000 children with severe acute malnutrition (SAM).
12. Emphasis in the water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH) programme
shifted from infrastructure projects to strengthening inter- and intra-ministerial
coordination to improve safe water supply, sanitation, hygiene and the promotion of
sustainable services. In partnership with the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and
Development, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Public Health, strategic
alliances, such as Sanitation and Water for All and the South Asian Conference on
Sanitation, raised WASH to a higher development priority and increase in budget
allocation. A national WASH policy, a WASH in Schools strategy, me nstrual hygiene
management guidelines and WASH communications strategy were introduced. Low cost water treatment technologies were introduced at community and household
levels, and a national water quality monitoring and surveillance system established.
Convergence between education and maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH)
programmes resulted in improved hygiene awareness and retention.
13. Child protection and youth empowerment programmes focused on follow-up
actions to the Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
UNICEF supported the Government to enhance the enabling environment to protect
children, including through development of a National Strategy for Street -Working
Children, Youth Policy, and a Strategy for HIV/AIDS. UNICEF is also facilitating
drafting of the Child Act. UNICEF strengthened regional Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism (MRM) on Children affected by Armed Conflict by initiating efforts to
prevent recruitment of children into armed forces. By end of 2013, the Child
Protection Action Network (CPAN) was active in 54 districts and 28 provinces. Since
2010, 11,354 cases of child rights violations were reported and acted upon by CPAN.
A nationwide campaign on child protection, involving 900 religious leaders, w as
implemented. A web-based birth registration system was developed with the Ministry
of Interior.
14. UNICEF response to humanitarian situations, including protracted and sudden onset emergencies, reached over 7 million women and children between 2010 and
2013. Support included nutrition interventions, efforts to prevent grave violations
against children, advocacy and sensitization campaigns to reopen schools, emergency
health services for children and pregnant women, access to safe drinking water, along
with hygiene and sanitation promotion and capacity-building of UNICEF cluster
members. The pace and efficiency of emergency response improved due to more
effective functioning of humanitarian clusters and inter-agency contingency planning
and preparedness measures, as well as the improved capacity and stewardship of the
Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority. Leadership of education
emergency response was transferred to Ministry of Education in 2013, with UNICEF
technical support.
15. As part of planning, monitoring and evaluation, the capacity of the Central
Statistics Office was strengthened in data collection, analysis including child poverty
and dissemination was strengthened, notably through the MICS 2010 -2011 and
collaboration with central statistics office Philippines. AfghanInfo is now functional.

5/12

The first equity-focused situation analysis of women and children since 2003 was
completed. Internal planning and monitoring systems were strengthened through
implementation of Monitoring Results for Equity System (MoRES) and DevInfobased monitoring systems. Gender equality in the Ministry of Education was
reinforced through training on gender-based budgeting and improved reporting.
Communication and public advocacy were significantly strengthene d following the
MTR in 2011. Advocacy tool kits and partnerships were developed, including one
with the Afghan Cricket Board and Moby Media Group. Proactive media engagement
also saw regular media briefings and capacity-building of journalists and editors in
Afghanistan.
Lessons learned
16. Equity-focused, multi-sectoral vulnerability assessments combined with
decentralized security analyses allowed UNICEF to develop a regionally appropriate
mix of programmes in priority areas and provinces. Programme strategies in each
province were adapted to local conditions of stability, fragility and institutional
capacity.
17. Using the concept of a “development programme implemented in a fragile
environment”, the office was able to integrate humanitarian and deve lopment
priorities. Interventions, both development and humanitarian, were implemented
according to emerging needs and local security conditions, with strengthened
community resilience at the core.
18. The integration of security analysts into programme teams and the hiring of local
negotiators in the polio eradication programme was an important achievement.
Localized community acceptance strategies enabled negotiated access with local
authorities and Anti-Government Elements in previously difficult-to-reach
communities.
19. Community engagement through local influencers and community structures
also helped improve access to basic services. The CBS model was instrumental in
providing access to education among marginalized girls and boys in remote locations.
Partnership with Community Development Committees improved monitoring of
community-based WASH and nutrition interventions. School management
committees (shuras) were instrumental in reducing the number of attacks on schools,
and negotiating reopening of schools that were closed amid fear of attacks by AntiGovernment Elements.
20. Recommendations from the MTR led to strengthening child protection systems,
building capacities of institutions offering justice to children, CPAN and service
providers. Greater emphasis was placed on coordinated efforts in responding to
children affected by armed conflict. UNICEF also took the lead in implementing a
broader agenda on adolescents, initiated through collaboration with actors working in
nutrition alongside early and child marriage.

6/12

The country programme, 2015-2019
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health

35 000

160 000

195 000

Nutrition

20 000

66 000

86 000

Water, sanitation and hygiene

20 000

43 000

63 000

Education

30 000

102 000

132 000

Child protection

25 000

35 000

60 000

Social inclusion

15 000

25 500

40 500

–

–

–

Cross-sectoral

65 000

24 000

89 000

Total

210 000

455 500

665 500

Humanitarian response*

* Emergency budget is not included.

Preparation process
21. The present document supports the Government of Afghanistan in realizing the
rights of all children and aligns with the Afghanistan National Development Strategy
and the Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. It was
developed in close consultation with all relevant line ministries of the government
and other partners, including non-governmental organizations and civil society
following a detailed equity-focused situation analysis of children and women under
the overall guidance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
22. The overall goal of the 2015-2019 country programme is to address inequity so
that all children, adolescents and women have access to services necessary to fulfil
their rights to survival, development, protection and participation. Contributing to the
overall goal, there are six convergent outcomes related to health care, nutrition, child
protection, education, water sanitation and hygiene and social inclusion.
23. The proposed country programme will focus on most-deprived provinces and
areas, mostly in South, South East and Western regions, where the programme will
accelerate the access of children and women to basic services and bring efforts to
scale. At a national level, the country programme will leverage the c atalytic role of
UNICEF to make sustainable changes in systems, policy, and programme
implementation, addressing root causes of rights violations. The programme will
support nationwide access to high-priority interventions such as routine
immunization, polio eradication, provision of teaching-learning materials, and
vitamin A supplementation. In the Northern Region the programme aims to reduce
vulnerability through a new focus on social protection and increased prioritization of
children’s issues in local planning.

7/12

Programme components, results and strategies
(a)

Health
24. The Health programme is guided by the new national Health and Nutrition
Policy 2012-2020, addressing barriers to supply, demand and quality. It will
contribute to improving MNCH care management and immunization. Its interventions
will contribute to decreasing the high neonatal mortality rate through support to the
National Action Plan for Newborn Health. Emphasizing convergence with nutrition
and WASH and a focus on adolescents, the programme will expand quality service
coverage and utilization in target areas and strengthen the technical capacity of the
Ministry of Public Health to control the health care system. The programme will also
increase the number of skilled service providers in health care and the Expanded
Programme on Immunization, particularly female outreach workers, to provide
quality MNCH services. Health facilities and outreach services will be strengthened
through the provision of equipment, supplies and improved inf rastructure, including
cold chains. National and subnational procurement and supply chain management
systems will be strengthened. Individual, family and community awareness to demand
essential MNCH services will be increased with a focus on the adoption o f appropriate
health behaviours among adolescent girls. Social mobilization and communication
strategies for polio eradication will be scaled up in all high -risk polio provinces with
improved vaccine availability. The capacity of national and provincial im plementing
partners to collect, analyse and disseminate sex-sensitive data for monitoring the
MNCH programme will be strengthened.

(b)

Nutrition
25. The Nutrition programme will address the barriers on the supply and demand
sides associated with stunting in early childhood. The programme will contribute to
improved infant and young child feeding practices, micronutrient nutrition, and
nutrition of adolescent girls and women. Support to the care of SAM among children
will be scaled up through community-based management of acute malnutrition and
facility-based treatment. The nutrition programme aims to improve access to adequate
equipment, supplies and infrastructure among service providers, including
community networks and community health workers. In prio rity areas, essential
information, counselling, support and services to infants, young children, adolescent
girls and mothers will be delivered. Demand from individuals, families and
communities for key nutrition services and the adoption of positive nutri tion
behaviours will be increased. Data collection, analysis and dissemination systems at
national and provincial levels on the nutrition situation of children and women will
be reinforced.

(c)

Water, sanitation and hygiene
26. The water, sanitation and hygiene programme, building on results and lessons
from the past, will seek to address supply- and demand-side barriers affecting access
to safe water, sanitation and hygiene. The new country programme will focus on
enhancing the capacity of governmental and non-governmental actors and community
structures to provide sustainable safe drinking water as well as promote behaviour
change for improved hygiene, water safety and sanitation practices among
communities. Evidence-based planning, monitoring and decision-making will be

8/12

strengthened through national capacity development on data and information
management.
(d)

Child protection
27. The child protection programme will promote a coordinated, multi -sectoral
child protection system and support further improvements in the legal and policy
environment, including through formulation of an overarching Child Act. The
programme will enhance the capacity of governmental and non-governmental
organizations and civil society service providers to prevent and respond to violence,
abuse and exploitation of children through support and reinforcement of the CPAN
network. The capacity of families, communities and religious leaders to protect
children will be promoted. Grave violations of the rights of children affected by armed
conflict will be monitored, reported and addressed through the MRM structures.

(e)

Education
28. The education programme will contribute to improving learning outcomes,
especially for girls, through increased access to and utilization of quality education.
This will be achieved through scaled-up access to primary education for girls and
boys in deprived areas and improved capacity of the Ministry of Education to manage
community-based education, ensuring higher transition rates to grade 4 for girls and
boys. Strengthened pre-service and in-service teacher training will increase the
number of female teachers. Access to safe water, separate toilets and hygiene facilities
for boys and girls in target schools will be strengthened by increasing the capacity of
the Ministry of Education at national/provincial level to promote WASH and
menstrual hygiene management. National capacity will be increased to develop a
child-friendly school policy and implementation guidelines. The Ministr y of
Education’s capacity to develop and operationalize a national assessment system to
monitor learning achievements and set national standards in primary school core
subjects will be strengthened and community-based early childhood care and
education will be piloted in select communities.

(f)

Social inclusion
29. The social inclusion programme is a cross-sectoral outcome to address root
causes of deprivations and adjust to emerging trends and issues such as increased
vulnerability of children to drug use, migration and urbanization. Social inclusion
results will seek to improve the capacity of UNICEF, the Government and civil society
to generate data and knowledge on child deprivation and disparities. Using local
planning processes, the programme will develop and implement evidence-based
inclusive policies through, for example, child-friendly budgets and improved social
protection systems at national and subnational levels. The national child rights
framework and child rights monitoring and reporting str uctures will be improved.
Mechanisms, platforms, partnerships and tools for advocacy and resource
mobilization will be enhanced. The knowledge and motivation of influencers and
decision-makers at the national, provincial and local levels to promote childre n’s
rights will be bolstered, as will efforts to work with families, communities and
religious leaders to eliminate harmful practices. Social, religious and institutional
actors will be actively encouraged to promote the participation and engagement of
children in decisions impacting their lives.

9/12

(g)

Humanitarian response
30. Risk reduction and humanitarian action. While providing necessary
humanitarian response, disaster risk management will be mainstreamed throughout
the new country programme. A multi-hazard and preventive approach, informed by
disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation, and peacebuilding will be
implemented. The programme also aims to mainstream resilience in UNICEF
programme planning and implementation and promote emergency pr eparedness and
timely response. Coordination of the WASH, nutrition clusters and the child
protection sub-cluster will be strengthened for effective planning, response and
recovery.

(h)

Gender
31. Gender is not a programme component as such but rather i s mainstreamed into
the programme. The country programme will adopt two -pronged approach to
strengthen realization of the rights of girls, boys, men and women by focusing on
programme results and strengthening institutional effectiveness. The focus will be on
concentrate on eliminating child marriage, improving access to health services and
education for adolescent girls.

(i)

Cross-sectoral
32. These costs will cover management and support for the overall country
programme, including planning and coordination, staff and operating expenses related
to supply, logistics, administration and finance, fundraising and media outreach.
Strategies
33. Recognizing the complex programming environment, the Afghanistan
programme builds on a rights-based approach that combines sustainable development
programming with risk-informed planning, emergency preparedness and
humanitarian response, including contingency planning. Attention to clearly
distinguishing humanitarian action from activities and objectives of polit ical, military
and other actors will ensure adherence of programme strategies to humanitarian
principles. Emphasis will be placed on supportive human resource policies to ensure
adequate staffing, security safety and mobility.
34. To ensure continuation of development activities in a fragile context and build
on experiences of the polio programme, the country programme will fully integrate
security risk management into planning, implementation and monitoring for partners
to better understand and reduce security risks. This will result in motivated partners,
improved service delivery and effective coverage.
35. A strategic shift will be made to build national and local government
institutional capacity in all programme areas. Using a capacity-gap analysis
undertaken at different government levels, the programme will support government led reforms and improve alignment with results. This will be achieved by providing
human, material and financial resources, and transfer of knowledge through training,
on-the-job skills transfer, inter-country/South-South cooperation and technical
assistance.
36. Innovative approaches will be promoted, including use of mobile technology to
improve performance monitoring. Process and product innovations that generate

10/12

gender-sensitive creative solutions to overcome access barriers to health centres and
schools will be piloted and scaled up. Strengthening the evidence base and knowledge
management and improving information management systems will be central in all
result areas reinforcing the role of UNICEF as a knowledge hub.
37. Policy and communication advocacy will be geared up to maintain neutrality
and impartiality in the provision of basic services and to maintain investment in
development activities. Advocacy will also raise the profile of children and promote
national commitment to protection of child rights through regular situation analysis
updates, engagement of UNICEF Goodwill Ambassadors and partnerships with
popular Afghan sports bodies, media institutions and local -level influencers.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
38. The democratization process in Afghanistan is still vulnerable and concerted
efforts are required to sustain gains and accelerate efforts to progressively realize the
rights of children and women. The country programme is forward-looking, equityfocused and is in line with ANDS, the National Priority Programmes (NPP) as well
as the UNDAF. Assuming a peaceful political and security transition in 2014 and
beyond, NPP will continue to guide development partners and all social, political and
economic development programming in Afghanistan. The UNICEF country
programme is closely aligned to NPP and various national sectoral policies.
39. The CPD is fully aligned with the goals and targets of the UNDAF that has been
developed, and can be adjusted as necessary once the UNDAF is endorsed by the
Government.
Relationship to international priorities
40. The country programme design is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its first two Optional Protocols, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the UNICEF Core Commitments for
Children in Humanitarian Action. A late signatory to the Millennium Declaration and
adherent to the Millennium Development Goals, Afghanistan developed its
Millennium Development Goals and targets, which run through to 2020. Country
programme results will contribute to the Millennium Development Goal targets for
Afghanistan and global results of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017. The country
programme will also align to the United Nations global development agenda and
UNICEF global commitments.

Major partnerships
41. The five-year country programme will guide UNICEF Afghanistan to strengthen
partnerships within the United Nations, with international development agencies,
including international financial institutions and public -private partnerships such as
the GAVI Alliance (Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization) and Global
Partnership for Education. Partnerships with the private sector, media, professional
bodies and universities will be broadened. UNICEF will continue efforts to gain
acceptance among local government, communities and community-based social
structures.

11/12

42. UNICEF will leverage its credibility to play a pivotal role in humanitarian
coordination structures, namely in the health, nutrition, education, protection and
WASH clusters, and within the Humanitarian Country Team and the United Nations
country team. UNICEF will also embark on the joint programming opportunities with
other United Nations agencies and seek to enhance United Nations coherence through
active participation in inter-agency, thematic and sectoral working groups.

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
43. The country programme will be managed by UNICEF in consultation with the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs as the nodal ministry. Mid -year and annual reviews with
sectoral ministries, government bodies, donors, non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies will be convened by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to
monitor progress. UNICEF will work with other United Nations agencies to
implement the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers and support national quality
assurance mechanisms.
44. UNICEF will also work with the Government to ensure availability, analysis and
use of disaggregated data at national and provincial levels to inform programme
design, implementation and monitoring. The integrated monitoring and evaluation
plan, linked to the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation framework, will monitor
results and outcomes. A strong focus of the plan will be on equity and gender to tackle
key national and subnational bottlenecks. UNICEF will support both independent and
government-led evaluations to improve effectiveness and sustainability of programme
results and learning.

12/12

