Albania
Common country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Albania
(DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2011/ALB/1) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 annual
session (20-23 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Contents
Page

I.

Situation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Past cooperation and lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

III.

Proposed programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

IV.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

I.

UNDP results and resources framework for Albania, 2012 -2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

II.

UNFPA results and resources framework for Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

III.

Government of Albania-UNICEF programme of cooperation — Summary results matrix,
2012-2016, including the indicative budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Annexes

2

I. Situation analysis1
1.
Albania has made significant progress towards achieving the vision, as set out
in its National Strategy for Development and Integration, 2007 -2013, to be a
―country with high living standards, which is integrated in the European and Euro Atlantic structures, is democratic, and guarantees the fundamental human rights and
liberties‖. In 2009, Albania applied for candidacy to the European Union (EU) but
needs to make progress in meeting the EU criteria before accession. Albania has
ratified all nine core United Nations human rights treaties, including the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and has committed itself to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The impressive economic
progress of Albania, averaging 5-6 per cent growth per year over the past decade,
has enabled progress towards key MDG targets, including combating extreme
poverty and gender inequalities, and improving health and nutrition.
2.
The Government of Albania recognizes that good governance is critical to
achieving its development goals and meeting international commitments.
Democratic institutions have been put in place in a relatively short period of time,
but the emergence of a culture of respect for democratic processes and the rule of
law remains a longer-term goal. Mechanisms need to be strengthened for the
engagement of civil society with the State and the engagement of the broader
population in demanding greater transparency and efficiency, including through the
emergence of a more pluralistic and independent media. The relatively low
participation of women is a particular challenge. Although the legal and policy
framework on gender has been strengthened, the main challenge lies in its
implementation and appropriate budgeting at national and local levels .
3.
Wider reform of public administration, strengthened system-wide capacities
and greater cooperation across ministries are required to make progress in the areas
of rule of law, anti-corruption and accountable governance. The Government has
identified the enhanced use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) as
being critical to improved governance and economic growth, launching a National
Cross-Cutting Strategy on Information Society in 2009. A cross -cutting strategy on
corruption and transparent governance exists, but a lack of data hampers the
assessment of progress.
4.
Managing external and internal migration remains a major development
challenge. Increased internal migration from rural to urban areas stems from the
growing economic and social divide between them. This, along with more effective
law-enforcement responses to combating cross-border crimes, has led to increased
internal trafficking in human beings, particularly of women and girls. Juvenile
justice reform is incomplete: for example, some 75 per cent of juvenile offenders are
placed in detention while awaiting trial.
5.
The impressive economic growth of Albania over the last decade is a
significant achievement. Yet sustaining equitable growth would be a challenge even
without the global economic crisis. The crisis has exposed a dependence on
remittances from abroad, a low level of diversification of trade and the need to
__________________
1

Sources include the Institute for Statistics (INSTAT), the Demographic and Health Survey
(2008-2009), the Living Standards Measurement Study, MDG Progress Report 2010 and
progress reports of the National Strategy for Development and Integration.

3

enhance competitiveness, including by attracting foreign direct investment. Barriers
to investment include weak property rights, pervasive corruption and
underdeveloped infrastructure. Another hurdle to overcome is ensuring an energy
supply adequate to meet the current and future needs of Albania.
6.
Albania has put in place sound policy, legal and institutional frame works for
environmental management and protection. The Government is committed to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and is beginning to consider the wider
implications of climate change. However, the transition to a market economy has led
to unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, together with weak enforcement
of standards and regulations. Despite frequent floods and the risk of earthquakes,
disaster response processes are not in place and disaster risk reduction is not well
integrated into central and local development plans.
7.
Despite the fact that national poverty levels have declined to 12.4 per cent
(2008), regional disparities remain. For example, poverty in mountainous areas is
26.6 per cent (2008). There is a broad awareness of the need to address development
disparities among regions and the even sharper disparities between municipalities
and communes, as well as the need to strengthen the capacity of local governments.
8.
Historically marginalized groups, such as Roma, Balkan-Egyptians, people with
disabilities and the elderly, often remain excluded. Fulfilment of basic rights by these
groups, especially Roma and Egyptians, is hobbled by established patterns of poverty
and discrimination. Social transfers are not always adequate and do not always reach
those in need, and systematic follow-up is lacking. People with disabilities and those
living with HIV face difficulties in accessing social services related to health,
rehabilitation and education and in securing employment. Anti -discrimination
legislation is in place but implementation is slow and not fully monitored. Domestic
violence remains widespread, with a majority of women having suffered some form
of abuse, and discriminatory gender attitudes are still entrenched. Municipal
structures concerned with protecting children from abuse or neglect are all but absent,
as the social protection system is unable to help children escape the conditions that
create poverty.
9.
The Government has pledged to achieve ‗education for all‘ by 2015, but public
spending on education in 2009 remained at only 3.8 per cent of gross domestic
product. Despite recent investment, basic education enrolment has declined since
2003 and preschool education enrolment has stagnated at 50 per cent. Clear
disparities exist: for example, disadvantaged groups such as the Roma have lower
access.
10. The incomplete reform of the health insurance programme and health
financing hampers access to health services, which are often of low quality. System wide capacities in health administration remain weak and there is limited access to
information on health. The under-five child mortality rate fell from 39 deaths per
1,000 live births in 2000 to 22 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2009, but is still short
of the MDG target of 10 deaths per 1,000 live births. While the burden of
communicable diseases is generally decreasing, cases of HIV and tuberculosis are
increasing, as is the incidence of non-communicable diseases and conditions such as
cancer, diabetes and mental disorders.
11. Strong growth has led to only a minor decline in unemployment, which
reached a low of 13.1 per cent in 2009. The access of young women and men to

4

employment remains a challenge, as do high levels of employment in the informal
economy. Discrimination in employment persists, despite the ratification of key
conventions by Albania and a number of government initiatives aiming to end the
practice. Another issue to address is the economic empowerment of women, whose
participation in the labour market (51.8 per cent) is much lower than that of men
(73.3 per cent).

II. Past cooperation and lessons learned2
12. The One UN Programme 2007-2011 (―the programme‖) focused on promoting
more transparent and accountable governance; greater participation in public policy
and decision-making; increased and more equitable access to quality basic services;
regional development and reduced disparities; and environmentally sustainable
development. A number of lessons learned from the 2007-2011 programme,
identified partly through the ―Country Led Evaluation — Delivering as One
Albania‖, which took place in 2010, will feed into the formulation of the new
programme.
13. The programme contributed to the reduction of ‗brain drain‘ in the public
sector and academia, helping to bring back to Albania, and retain, critical human
capital. Support was also provided to the establishment of an ICT network among
government institutions, contributing to their modernization and increased
effectiveness. The programme supported the Government in the Living Standards
Measurement Survey, Demographic and Health Survey, national census and MDG
reviews, providing critical evidence for policymaking and targeting services towards
marginalized groups. This support also resulted in enhanced national capaci ties for
the collection, analysis and use of data. ‗One UN‘ interventions also contributed to
strengthening the capacity of the Government to coordinate and monitor the
implementation of the National Strategy for Development and Integration.
14. The programme provided technical assistance that contributed to the adoption
of key gender- and child-related legislation and the establishment of indicators and
data sets on gender and child rights. This brought increased attention and
monitoring capacity to these issues. The support provided by the programme helped
women‘s organizations to raise awareness of and advocate for an end to violence
against women, and to monitor its incidence. Efforts also helped to double the
number of Members of Parliament who are wome n. Support for civil and birth
registration in Roma and Egyptian communities contributed towards increased
access to basic services. In the area of justice, juvenile offenders are now more
frequently receiving alternatives to detention.
15. Support provided to the poorest regions helped to improve livelihoods and
enhance national and local capacities to meet the MDGs. The programme also
helped to improve migration management by aligning migration with policies
creating employment and strategies for the labour market.
16. The programme supported the development and implementation of policies
promoting inclusion, and regulatory and institutional frameworks and standards
leading to enhanced delivery of health services. Special attention was paid to
__________________
2

Sources include the Country-led Evaluation of Delivering as One Albania (July 2010), as well as
programme evaluations.

5

marginalized and at-risk groups, as well as the elderly. Education policies and
guidelines are in place, promoting inclusive education for all children.
17. Government capacities to meet the environmental requirements of the EU and
multilateral agreements were enhanced through technical support provided to the
development and implementation of key legal instruments, climate change
adaptation and mitigation, the maintenance of protected areas, and the promotion of
cleaner means of economic production. The programme contributed to the
achievement of Albania being declared mine-free in 2009; as a result of these
efforts, local communities in the poorest region of the country regained use of their
farmland.
18. While the programme successfully supported the introduction of important
policies, laws and strategies, capacity within the Government for their
implementation has not always been sufficient, and budgetary commitments have
fallen short. To ensure the sustainability of these achievements, the Programme will
intensify efforts to strengthen the capacity and accountability of the Government
regarding implementation. Particular attention will be paid to advocacy for the
rights of the most marginalized, including through enhancing civil society
engagement in this area.
19. High turnover of staff in public administration has hindered delivery of public
services and affected the pace of reforms. Future cooperation will therefore
emphasize the importance of a sustainable professional civil service and support the
strengthening of institutions, tools and mechanisms for effective and equitable
service delivery, particularly at the local level.
20. United Nations assistance under the new programme takes into account the
status of Albania as a middle-income country and the needs of the most
disadvantaged. Social and economic indicators have improved on average, although
significant disparities and inequities exist; efforts will focus especially on the poor,
disadvantaged and marginalized. By emphasizing advocacy, policy advice and
promoting East-East cooperation, including on how to meet international human
rights commitments, the programme will contribute to the goals of Albania to meet
EU accession requirements and make the best use of its growing national wealth and
EU pre-accession funding.

III. Proposed programme
21. The strategic direction and outcomes of the draft common country programme
for Albania, 2012-2016 (―the programme‖), were defined during a Strategic
Prioritization Retreat facilitated by the United Nations System Staff College. The
retreat was followed by an intensive period of consultations with line ministries,
civil society and development partners. The draft programme was presented to the
Government Modernization Committee, which confirmed that the strategic d irection
is well aligned with the National Strategy for Development and Integration and that
it reflects national development priorities and international commitments, along
with United Nations norms and standards. At the request of the Government, the
new programme also continues to build upon the Delivering as One approach of the
United Nations.

6

22. The goal of the programme is to promote sustainable and equitable
development, social inclusion and the adherence to international norms and
fulfilment of international obligations, in support of the integration of Albania into
the EU.
23. The programme is guided and informed by the development priorities of
Albania as expressed in the National Strategy for Development and Integration; the
need to further accelerate efforts to achieve the MDGs; international commitments
and human rights obligations; the priority of the Government of Albania to join the
EU; and the global reform context, specifically the principles of the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action.
24. The programme builds upon United Nations values, the comparative
advantages of participating funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations, and lessons learned from previous cooperation. The normative a nd
operational roles, neutral positioning, convening power, policy expertise and
technical capacity of the United Nations system will be brought to bear in ways that
complement the assistance provided by other multilateral and bilateral development
partners. Cooperation between the United Nations system agencies and the
Government of Albania, notably through the provision of policy advisory services,
will be guided by the mandate of the United Nations to advocate for and support
implementation of international human rights standards, gender equality,
environmental sustainability, development of national capacities, accountability and
transparency, and results-based management.
25. The programme brings together the expertise of 19 funds, programmes,
specialized agencies, organizations and entities of the United Nations (Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Atomic Energy
Agency, International Fund for Agricultural Development, International Labour
Organization, International Trade Centre, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS,
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, United Nations
Development Programme, Economic Commission for Europe, United Nations
Environment Programme, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, United Nations Population Fund, Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Children‘s Fund, United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
United Nations Volunteers and the World Health Organization) and the International
Organization for Migration. Of these, eight are resident in Albania.

A.

Governance and Rule of Law
Support will be provided to strengthening public oversight, civil society and
media institutions to enhance the accountability of authorities to the public and
the enforcement of commitments to gender equality in planning, programming
and budgeting processes.
26. To strengthen accountability mechanisms, United Nations agencies will work
with authorities at all levels to ensure that rights, policies, services, entitlements and
complaints mechanisms are known to citizens and used, especially by the
marginalized. The programme will continue to promote and support the work of
public oversight bodies to make them more accessible, especially to the

7

marginalized. The programme will also support ministries in the introduct ion of
relevant secondary legislation.
27. The Government will be assisted to improve public oversight and the regulatory
framework for engagement with civil society (including the media), and to strengthen
mechanisms through which civil society helps to ensure government accountability
and transparency. Civil society, including women‘s groups, will be supported to
engage citizens and raise awareness on and advocate for human rights, including
women‘s rights, and access to justice. This will include the engagement of civil
society in monitoring the status of human rights and access to justice and reporting to
treaty bodies. Other areas to be covered in this broader engagement by civil society
include addressing poverty and economic development in rural areas, the provision of
social and health services, gender equality, HIV/AIDS and anti -corruption. The
United Nations agencies will support increased networking among national and local
civil society organizations, notably women‘s groups, building capacity in policy
analysis, collective negotiation and lobbying.
28. The programme will support the implementation and monitorin g of
international commitments — for example, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and Security Co uncil resolution 1325
(2000) — and national legislation related to gender. It will support the
mainstreaming of gender into other legislation, strategies, policies, and budgetary
processes at local and national levels.
Public administration will be supported to enhance capacities, practices and
systems for effective delivery of national development priorities and international
obligations.
29. The programme will support the planning, monitoring and evaluation
processes of the National Strategy for Development and Integration as well as
cooperation among line ministries in sectors that require it, such as health,
environment and gender. The United Nations agencies will assist the Government in
further pursuing the goals of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and Accra
Agenda for Action by supporting efforts to strengthen public financial management
and national procurement systems, with the aim of increasing use of these national
systems by donors.
30. In the area of public administration reform, the programme will contribute to
strengthening human resource management, development and training. In this
regard, efforts will support the reversal of ―brain drain‖, encouraging highly
qualified Albanians who have left the country to return. The programme will at the
same time develop the various capacities of policy planners and national and local
officials and support the professionalization of service delivery in health and child related services.
31. The capacity of the Government to collect, compile, analyse and disseminate
data will be supported in the areas of poverty measurement, social protection, child
protection and welfare, health, gender and population dynamics. Non -State users of
data will be assisted to enhance their capacity to demand, collec t and analyse data
for better monitoring of government performance.
32. The programme will support improving the legal and technical foundations for
IT infrastructure. This will involve increasing the provision of e -services, and

8

promoting new technologies that make local and national systems more transparent
and accessible by the public, including technologies related to customs and taxation.
The programme will support the goals of the Government to meet international
obligations and standards for juvenile justice, for managing migration and for
fighting organized crime.
33. The fight against organized crime will be supported with the implementation
of the Integrated Border Management Strategy. Joint training will be provided to
relevant State institutions to ensure a unified response to cross-border crimes.
Awareness will be raised on the risks of internal trafficking. Collaboration will be
fostered with other groups in society, including the private sector, on the
investigation and prosecution of money laundering, smuggling and trafficking.
Efforts will be made to ensure that legislation in these areas conforms to
international standards. The programme will support the development of a judicial
training curriculum for judges and prosecutors.
34. To support the efforts of the Government to tackle corruption, the programme
will help to promote a culture of non-tolerance toward corruption in the public
sector as well as measures to reduce the vulnerability of government institutions,
based on the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The programme will
assist the Government to strengthen public financial management to ensure
transparent and appropriate budgets, entitlements and expectations of public
servants.
35. As part of the International Consortium assisting Albania in reform of the
justice system, the programme will support central and local authorities in reforming
the probation and pre-trial detention systems, providing alternatives to detention and
diversion for juveniles, supporting child victims and witnesses of crime, and
ensuring children‘s access to justice.
36. Government efforts in managing migration will be further supported at all
levels, including through the implementation of the Strategy on Migration. Efforts
will centre on countering irregular migration and trafficking and reintegrating
returning migrants, including the most vulnerable.

B.

Economy and environment
The enhancement of regulatory frameworks, trade facilitation and investment
promotion for inclusive and sustainable growth will be supported.
37. Support will be provided to increase competitiveness by developing the
capacities of economic institutions, promoting market development and supporting
the introduction and implementation of enabling policies and measures. The
programme will support the collection, processing and analysis of data in line with
international and EU standards and promote greater supply chain integration and
compliance with EU competition law. The new investment agency will be supporte d
to attract diaspora investment and remittances for development. Support will be
provided to strengthen economic diplomacy.
38. The trade and business climate will be improved through the fostering of
cooperation between government and business, the estab lishment of one-stop-shops
at border customs, increased capacities for implementation of best practices in trade

9

facilitation, including the provision of an automated system for customs data and
establishment of the Single Window to enhance the efficie nt exchange
information between trade and government. The programme will support
establishment of the Albanian Business Relay and Innovation Centre and
regulation of energy that is renewable and free of greenhouse gas emissions.

the
of
the
the

39. The programme will promote Corporate Social Responsibility and the Global
Compact. Assistance will also be provided in upgrading public and utility services.
The programme will work with service providers to improve quality and client
satisfaction. In order to empower consumers, the programme will help to enhance
the capacities of responsible national and non-governmental institutions such as the
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Energy, the Consumer Protection Commission,
consumer protection associations, and other institutions working in the field of food
safety.
Efforts to protect, preserve and use natural resources more sustainably will be
supported, with consideration given to the impacts of climate change and to the
achievement of European Union environment standards.
40. The United Nations agencies will advise Albania on how to meet its
commitments related to climate change and to support implementing bodies to
monitor progress, promote the use of the Clean Development Mechanism and
mitigation measures such as solar-water heating technology, and to introduce
adaptation measures. The Government will be advised on how to translate United
Nations environmental conventions into practice, specifically those pertaining to
biodiversity and protected areas, desertification, forestry and water resource
management.
41. The United Nations agencies will assist the Government to adopt a strategic
approach for environmental planning, and will support the establishment of a
functional inter-ministerial decision-making body. The agencies will also support
the creation of economic instruments to increase funds available for addressing
environmental priorities.
42. Improving governmental capacity to carry out environment assessments in the
context of increased public awareness and participation will help Albania to meet
environmental standards. The programme will support the expansion of the
environmental education curriculum and activities in schools. Solid waste will be
more appropriately managed at the local level. Support will con tinue for monitoring
air pollution, water quality and waste water, along with mainstreaming the European
Water Framework Directive and implementing the National Cleaner Production
Programme. Green jobs will be promoted in waste management and environmental
protection.
43. Development of central and local capacity will be assisted in disaster risk
preparedness and prevention, and the mobilization of volunteers. Attention will be
paid to national heritage sites. The United Nations agencies will support the
Government in implementing the National Action Plan for the Destruction of
Obsolete and Surplus Ammunition by 2013.

10

C.

Regional and local development
Enhanced institutional capacities, frameworks and policies aimed at promoting
equitable and sustainable regional development will be supported.
44. The programme will provide support to central, regional and local government
institutions to formulate a regional development policy and strategic approach to
absorb EU IPA (instrument for pre-accession assistance) funds for regional
development. Advice and training will be provided on institutional reforms and
innovations and on gender-sensitive local economic development planning and
implementation.
45. The programme will support policymaking on food safety and quality,
providing technical assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer
Protection and local governments to support competitive farm production and
markets, build institutions, and harmonize legislation with the EU acquis
communautaire. Selected local interventions will include the provision of
vocational-training grants for members of poor households without viable
agricultural assets and the provision of technical assistance and support for
economically active poor women. Where appropriate, the programme may invest in
local infrastructure and provide co-financing and credit for small agricultural
producers and rural businesses.
46. The programme will promote local economic develop ment through sustainable
tourism, and will support relevant governmental institutions and Albanian regions in
implementing the national strategies for Tourism, Culture and Cultural Marketing.
Support will also be provided to strengthen capacities for cultural diplomacy. The
programme will support the strengthening of legislation and policies that develop
and safeguard cultural and natural heritage sites; the fight against illicit trafficking
of cultural property; and the upgrading of national capacities for the preservation,
management and promotion of heritage.
Support will be given to capacity development of regional and local governments
for delivery of equitable, inclusive and accountable services to the public, with
particular attention paid to marginalized groups and communities.
47. The Ministry of Interior will be advised on the implementation of the
Decentralization Strategy, including effective fiscal decentralization and
institutional consolidation. Innovative approaches to regional development will be
facilitated through decentralized cooperation. Advice will be provided on a
framework for inter-municipal cooperation that enables local governments to fulfil
obligations under their increased competencies, and on gender -responsive reform of
regional government institutions.
48. The United Nations agencies will provide technical assistance to regional and
local authorities on administrative and financial management and coordination
between central and local governments, emphasizing innovation and g endersensitive improvements. The programme will support the design and implementation
of local legislation or policies that ensure access to services — in particular for
marginalized groups — that promote community participation, and that align actions
with national plans such as the National Action Plan for Roma. Monitoring and
reporting on the implementation of regional and local plans will also be supported.

11

D.

Inclusive social policy
Legislation, policies promoting inclusion, social protection mechanisms and
special interventions that ensure fulfilment of the rights of disadvantaged
individuals and groups will be supported.
49. The United Nations agencies will assist the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs
and Equal Opportunities in convening national partners to harmonize support to the
national social inclusion strategy, to identify policy gaps and to monitor and review
progress. The programme will support the review of the social protection
mechanism and its application, in terms of legislation and its implementation and
the availability of services for vulnerable groups. The United Nations agencies will
help to ensure that relevant statistics are available and will foster necessary dialogue
among public and private institutions. Efforts will rely on established institutions or
task forces, such as those promoting inclusion of Roma populations.
50. The reform of the social protection system and the monitoring of its impact on
vulnerable groups will continue to receive attention. United Nations agen cies will
work with the Government to reduce child poverty and address the intergenerational
transmission of poverty. Consideration will be given to whether specialized services,
in addition to monetary benefits, can help vulnerable groups to escape exclus ion.
51. Efforts will assist the implementation and monitoring of the Anti -Discrimination
Law. Legislation necessary for the implementation of the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities will be identified. Local authorities wi ll be
assisted to provide relevant services. Policy interventions will be tested and
awareness raised on the rights of persons with disabilities.
52. The programme will support the implementation and monitoring of the law on
the Protection of the Rights of the Child and as well as research and innovations to
reduce risks for children, including substance abuse and violence. Existing local
protection mechanisms for children will be expanded and integrated into the State
Social Services. Family-based alternatives to institutionalization will be promoted
for children without parental care. The Government will be assisted to ensure that
all newborn children are registered, and that vulnerable families apply improved
parenting practices and have access to organized childcare.
53. The capacities of institutions, including the media, will be strengthened to
work with young people and promote rights-based values and healthy lifestyles. The
programme will assist the development of cohesive national youth policies and an
inclusive national volunteer infrastructure.
54. In support of the Madrid Declaration and International Plan of Action on
Ageing, the United Nations agencies may provide orientation for government,
business and civil society groups so that they are able to provide and monitor
services for older persons and foster their participation in society.
55. The programme will support enforcement of the Domestic Violence Law by
local authorities through stronger budgeting and a stronger response by health,
justice, and security sectors.

12

Efforts will be supported to ensure the participation of all boys and girls in
quality formal and informal education, paying particular attention to
marginalized groups.
56. The Ministry of Education and Science will be assisted to achieve ―education
for all‖, especially through better support for schools with high dropout and
collaboration with social protection mechanisms. Assistance will be given to schools
so that they are welcoming, free of violence and supportive of all chi ldren, including
those with disabilities, and help young people to build basic life skills and positive
behaviours. The United Nations agencies will support the Ministry in promoting
universal preschool education, focusing on vulnerable families and the de velopment
of financing models for low-cost, quality preschools.
57. In collaboration with other relevant ministries, United Nations agencies will
help to incorporate education on human rights, health and cultural heritage through
the development of teacher training materials and the capacities of teachers, school
psychologists and social workers. Capacity for improved school management will
be strengthened in cooperation with civil society.
Efforts to provide universal health insurance and access to quality, gendersensitive and age-appropriate public health services will be supported.
58. Relevant ministries will be supported to provide integrated activities for
preventive public health measures in line with the International Health Regulations,
including for anti-tobacco actions, communicable diseases, HIV/AIDS, sexually
transmitted diseases, substance dependence, and a broad range of non -communicable
diseases. Relevant institutions will be assisted in research, surveillance, analysis, and
evaluation, with the aim of improving public health policies, health financing and
health insurance. Public health institutions will be assisted to communicate public
health priorities and maintain an effective communication system during crises.
59. The United Nations agencies will support the Ministry of Health in
strengthening maternal and young child health systems, including better parenting
and feeding practices, community outreach, and integration with social services
interventions. Training on reproductive health and gender-based violence for health
professionals will be supported. Support for nuclear medicine and radiotherapy will
continue. Institutions will be strengthened to help communities to monitor and
demand quality health services. The involvement of males in issues of reproductive
health, gender and population will be promoted, including through media. Youth friendly primary health services, especially for disadvantaged adolescents, will also
be promoted.
60. The programme will advocate multisectoral dialogue in support of prevention
and care related to HIV/AIDS, focusing on the most-at-risk populations. Advocacy
will also emphasize overcoming stigma and discrimination and inclusion of people
affected by HIV/AIDS in social protection schemes. Educator s, social workers,
health officials and law enforcement officers will be oriented on prevention of drug
use. Prevention of drug abuse and HIV/AIDS will be linked to protection services
for the groups most at risk, including those in prisons.

13

Efforts to ensure the realization of the fundamental right to work, inclusive
employment opportunities and comprehensive social dialogue will be supported.
61. The programme will contribute to transforming the work of the National
Employment Services from that of administering benefits to providing services for
job seekers and enterprises. This will include strengthening the planning and
monitoring of policies and active labour-market measures. The focus will be on
groups at risk of exclusion. The Government will be supported to promote the
reintegration of returning migrants and to design policies promoting a higher
percentage of employment in the formal economy through means such as effective
social dialogue.
62. The programme will aid the State Labour Inspectorate to improve inspection
and occupational safety and health services, including through effective
implementation of labour inspection policy. It will promote partnership among the
Labour Inspectorate, the Ombudsperson and the Office of the Anti -Discrimination
Commissioner.
63. The programme will assist authorities to increase the access of women to
social services, professional education, health services, social and employment
insurance, ownership of assets and microcredit. The Health Insurance Institute will
be assisted to expand its maternal protection scheme.

IV. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
64. To the extent possible, existing national institutional structures will be used for
strategic leadership, direction, oversight and coordinati on of the programme. The
programme will be supported by a coherent governance structure, with clear lines of
accountability and decision-making. Overall programme management and
coordination will be the joint responsibility of the Government and the United
Nations agencies.
65. The Government Modernization Committee will serve as the highest -level
policy, coordination and decision-making authority of the Government in the
programme, determining strategic priorities and reviewing progress. The
Department of Strategy and Donor Coordination will be responsible for coordinating
Government, United Nations and donor activities, and ensuring that the
commitments of the Government related to the programme are fulfilled and that
progress towards objectives is monitored.
66. The United Nations country team (UNCT), under the leadership of the United
Nations Resident Coordinator (UNRC), will work towards the implementation of the
programme. The programme will be made operational through Annual Work Plans
determining the results and outputs to be achieved. The Integrated Results Matrix
and Budgetary Framework will encourage the United Nations agencies to be results oriented and work as one. Through the UN Coherence Fund, the coherence,
efficiency and efficacy of United Nations support will be enhanced through the
pooling of resources into a common fund for key strategic priorities.
67. On behalf of UNCT, the UNRC, together with the Government, will lead
efforts to mobilize resources for the UN Coherence Fund. To increase th e
predictability of resources, donors will be encouraged to contribute non -earmarked
resources as early as possible and preferably with multi -year commitments. United

14

Nations agencies will use their core resources and aim to mobilize funds to cover
the funding gap in the Budgetary Framework. Resources raised by agencies are
expected to be committed for the programme. Funding of the programme may be a
challenge because of overall declining development funding in Albania. In response,
the support of the donor community for the new programme will be critical.
68. United Nations agencies will work with the Government to establish a
Monitoring and Evaluation framework, making use of existing Government data
collection and management systems to the extent possible. Instruments expected to
be used include periodic Government surveys, supplementary studies, joint periodic
programme reviews, and independent assessments and evaluations. A midterm
review of the programme will be conducted to ensure that it is aligned wi th national
priorities. A final evaluation will be carried out to assess overall achievement of
results.

15

16

Annex I
UNDP results and resources framework for Albania, 2012-2016
Resources for 2012-2016:

Regular: $2,476,000 Other: $36,000,000

Total: $38,476,000

National priority: Develop and consolidate the democratic state
United Nations common country programme outcome 1.1: Strengthen public oversight, civil society and media institutions to make authorities
more accountable to the public, and better able to enforce gender-equality commitments in planning, programming and budgeting processes;
outcome 1.2: Enhance public administration capacities, practices and systems so as to effectively deliver on national development priorities and
international obligations; outcome 1.3: Ensure that the Government meets international obligations and standards for juvenile justice, for managing
migration and in the fight against organized crime and corruption.
Related strategic plan focus area: Democratic Governance
Government
partner
contribution

Other partner
contributions

UNDP
contribution

Indicator(s), baselines and target(s)
for UNDP contributions

Indicative country
programme outputs

Legal reforms
for compliance
with
international
genderequality
standards.
Continued
commitment
on aid
effectiveness
and transparent
use of public
funds.

United Nations
and donor
support to
women‘s
groups‘
advocacy for
policy reform
and
strengthening of
public
administration
and anticorruption
measures.

Support to
strengthen publicoversight
institutions to
promote
transparency and
accountability;
support gender law
implementation
across all relevant
public institutions;
promote
coordinated national
development
planning and
monitoring; support
implementation of
United Nations
Convention against
Corruption.

Implementation of national policies
and legislation to advance gender
equality.
Baseline: 2010 Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against
Women observations
Target: These observations
implemented by 2016

Capacities of Parliament
and Ombudsman
strengthened to ensure
greater transparency and
accountability of
Government.

Extent of donor use of national
procurement/ financial systems.
Baseline: Derived from 2010 OECD
survey
Target: more than 50 per cent by
2015
Number of local government units
with anti-corruption measures.
Baseline3: to be confirmed
Target: to be confirmed

Legal drafting and
advocacy campaign
completed concerning legal
and policy instruments
required for compliance
with European Union
standards and the
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against
Women.

11-29486

__________________
3

Baseline and target to be identified through the UNDP anti-corruption programme formulation in 2011.

Indicative
resources/
outcome
Regular:
$710,000
Other:
$7,500,000

National priority: Achieve rapid, balanced and sustainable economic and social development
United Nations common country programme outcome 2.1: Government, trade organizations and the private sector support inclusive and
sustainable economic growth through enhanced regulatory frameworks, trade facilitation and investment promotion; outcome 2.2: National
authorities and institutions, the private sector and the general public protect, preserve and use natural resources more sustainably, taking into account
the impacts of climate change and the achievement of European environment standards.
Related strategic plan focus areas: Poverty Reduction/Environment and Sustainable Development
Strengthen
legal and
institutional
capacities in
support of
foreign direct
investment
(FDI) and
private sector
development.
Strengthen
compliance
with
environmental
agreements.

Private sector
contribution to
increased and
inclusive growth.
Donor support to
compliance with
EU environmental
acquis. Local
community
mobilization by
civil society
organizations.
World Bank
support to disaster
management.

Promotion of
inclusive economic
growth by developing
capacities of trade and
FDI promotion
institutions. Support to
meeting national
climate change
commitments, and
compliance with
international
standards.

Number of businesses using services of
Albanian Investment and Development
Agency (AIDA).
Baseline: 0
Target: 200

Capacities of Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Energy
and AIDA supported to
promote trade and FDIS.

Local authorities integrate
Number of Environmental Impact
climate change into
Assessments (EIAs) conducted in line development strategies
with EU standards.
considering opportunities
Baseline: EIAs rarely conducted in line highlighted during Cancun
with EU standards
Conference of the Parties
Target: 50 per cent
(COP) 16.
Number of climate change adaptation
measures prepared/implemented
Baseline: 0
Target: 5

Regular:
$516,000
Other:
$12,500,000

Options for protected areas
expansion and establishment
of protected area network
identified considering the
outcomes of Nagoya COP 10.

National priority: Balanced regional development and reduced inequalities between regions
United Nations common country programme outcome 3.1: Institutional capacities, frameworks and policies meeting international standards
promote equitable and sustainable regional development, focusing on land use and livelihoods for women and men, and on agriculture, tourism and
cultural and natural-heritage management; outcome 3.2: The public, including marginalized groups and communities, better receive equitable,
inclusive and accountable decentralized services from regional and local governments.
Related strategic plan focus areas: Poverty Reduction/Democratic Governance
Harmonize
national sector
policy
objectives with
subnational
priorities.
Deepen
decentralization
reform in line

Austria,
Switzerland and
German Agency
for Technical
Cooperation
support regional
planning and
development of
small and

Support to
formulation of
national policy on
regional
development and
regional
development plans.
Technical assistance
to strengthen the

National policy on subnational
regional development is implemented
Baseline: draft strategy available
Target: yes
Number of culture and tourism
marketing tools implemented
Baseline: 0
Target: 5

Six regional development
strategies or plans under
implementation.

Regular:
$650,000

Options identified for the
operationalization of the
Albania culture and tourism
marketing strategy.

Other:
$12,000,000

18

with the
subsidiarity
principle. Lead
implementation
of national
strategies on
culture and on
tourism.

medium-sized
industries.
UN-Women
promotes local
level genderresponsive
budgeting.
UNESCO
supports
cultural
development.

implementation of
decentralization
strategy and local
government
capacities for
service delivery.
Promotion of
sustainable tourism
for local economic
development.

National priority: Equal opportunities will be established for men and women
United Nations common country programme outcome 4.1: The rights of disadvantaged individuals and groups are equally ensured through
legislation, inclusive policies, social protection mechanisms and special interventions; outcome 4.2: All people better realize fundamental rights to
work, have greater and inclusive employment opportunities, and can engage in comprehensive social dialogue.
Related strategic plan focus areas: Poverty Reduction
Ministry of
Labour
coordination of
the crosscutting
national social
inclusion
strategy.
Government
implements
active labourmarket
measures.

Local government
units ensure
coherent approach
to addressing the
needs of
vulnerable people.
Private sector
embraces active
labour market
measures. United
Nations support to
Roma and
implementation of
national social
inclusion strategy.

Support to analytical
work, legislation,
policy development to
help implement
national social
inclusion strategy to
address the needs of
marginalized persons,
e.g. the Roma and
disabled.
Development of
public-private
partnerships.
Employment
promotion among
women, youth and
vulnerable people.

Number of regions/municipalities with
plans for social inclusion in place,
funded and providing statutory social
protection services.
Baseline: 0
Target: 12
Number of domestic violence cases
addressed by community coordinated
response (CCR) mechanisms.
Baseline: 0 (CCR decreed in Albania
February 2011)
Target: to be confirmed4
Number of vulnerable men and women
benefiting from active labor market
measures.
Baseline: 300 beneficiaries from UNDP
supported schemes in 2010
Target: 350 beneficiaries supported
annually

11-29486

__________________
4

Scale depends on lessons that will be learned from pilot initiatives in 2011.

National strategies related to
social inclusion implemented
and monitored.
Vulnerable men and women
benefit from employment
opportunities generated
through active labour market
measures.

Regular:
$600,000
Other:
$4,000,000

Annex II
UNFPA results and resources framework for Albania
National priority: Develop and consolidate the democratic state
United Nations draft common country programme document (CCPD) (pillar 1) outcomes:
Outcome 1.1: Strengthened public oversight, civil society and media institutions make authorities more accountable to the public, and better able to
enforce gender-equality commitments in planning, programming and budgeting processes;
Outcome 1.2: Public administration has enhanced capacities, practices and systems to effectively deliver on national development priorities and
international obligations
Programme
UNFPA outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets (based on the draft CCPD outcomes Partners
Indicative
component
listed above)
resources by
programme
component
Gender
equality

Population
and
development

Outcome 1.1.1: An enabling sociocultural environment that is conducive to male participation
and promotes gender equality and reproductive rights
Indicator: proportion of currently married women aged 15-49 who participate in decisionmaking in the following areas: health care, major household purchases, purchases of daily
household needs, and visits to her family or relatives, disaggregated by residence and wealth
quintile
Baseline: 56%
(a) percentage who participate in all four decisions: 56%
(b) urban: 68%
(c) rural: 47%
(d) lowest wealth quintile: 37.5%
Target: 25% increase
Outcome 1.2.1: Data on population dynamics, gender equality, sexual and reproductive health
and HIV/AIDS available, analysed and used to develop and monitor policies and programme
implementation
Indicator: proportion of national policies that incorporate population dynamics, reproductive
health and rights and gender equality
Baseline: 40%; Target: 70%
Indicator: four new health and population national studies carried out
Baseline: zero; Target: four
Indicator: all health and population indicators disaggregated by sex and geography
Baseline: not available; Target: yes
Indicator: census data processed and disseminated
Baseline: not available; Target: yes

Ministry of
Health;
Ministry of
Culture, Youth
and Sports;
Ministry of
Labour and
Social Affairs;
civil society
organizations;
United Nations
organizations;
Institute of
Statistics;
Institute of
Public Health

$0.3 million
from regular
resources

$1.1 million
from regular
resources;
$1.5 million
from other
resources

20

National priority: The Government will establish equal opportunities for men and women
United Nations draft CCPD (pillar 4) outcomes:
Outcome 4.1: The rights of disadvantaged individuals and groups are equally ensured through legislation, inclusive policies, social-protection
mechanisms and special interventions;
Outcome 4.2: Boys and girls over the age of three (including youth), especially from marginalized groups, access and participate in high-quality
education and learning opportunities;
Outcome 4.3: The health of the population is protected by universal health insurance coverage, and high-quality, gender-sensitive and ageappropriate public health services for all, including identified at-risk populations is available;
Outcome 4.4: All people are better able to take advantage of their fundamental right to work, have greater and inclusive employment opportunities,
and can engage in comprehensive social dialogue
Programme
UNFPA outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets (based on the draft CCPD outcomes Partners
Indicative
component
listed above)
resources by
programme
component
Reproductive
Outcome 4.1.1: The rights of disadvantaged individuals of reproductive health age and of the
Ministry of
$0.4 million
health and
elderly are equally ensured through standardized and oversight mechanisms integrated into
Health;
from regular
rights
primary health care, inclusive policies, social-protection mechanisms and special
Health Insurance
resources;
interventions
Institute;
$0.3 million
Indicator: Unmet need for family planning for married women (15-49 years) decreased
Institute of Public from other
Baseline: 60% ; Target: 20%
Health;
resources
Government
Gender
Outcome 4.1.2: Responses to gender-based violence, particularly domestic and sexual
$0.2 million
social services;
equality
violence, are expanded through sexual and reproductive health care and through HIV
from regular
civil society
prevention services
resources;
organizations;
Indicator: Percentage of gender-based violence cases addressed by the health system
$0.3 million
United Nations
Baseline: 1%; Target: 25%
from other
organizations;
resources
public health
Reproductive Outcome 4.2.1 Access of young people to gender-sensitive, life skills-based sexual and
$0.3 million
directorates;
health and
reproductive health information in secondary education is improved
from regular
rights
Indicator: percentage of secondary schools that implement health and sexual and reproductive Ministry of
resources
Labour, Social
health curricula
$1 million
Affairs and Equal from regular
Baseline: 0%; Target: 20%
Outcome 4.3.1: Demand, access and utilization of reproductive health services, especially for Opportunities;
resources;
Ministry of
women, young people and other vulnerable groups increased
$1.5 million
Education and
Indicator: rate of improvement in sexual reproductive health key health indicators –
from other
Science
contraceptive prevalence rate (modern methods) for married women (15-49 years)
resources
Baseline: 10.6% (2009); Target: 15%
Gender
Outcome 4.4.1: Increased access of women to integrated health education, especially in rural
$0.2 million
equality
and hard to reach areas
from regular
Indicator: number of women reached by integrated health education
resources;
Baseline: 0; Target: 18,000
$0.5 million
from other
resources

Annex III
Government of Albania-UNICEF programme of cooperation
Summary results matrix, 2012-2016, including the indicative budget
UNICEF programme component: Governance for children

Budget:

Regular resources: $800,000
Other resources: $5,000,000
UNICEF-supported result: Effective public oversight and monitoring of institutions help to ensure implementation of policies and
programmes addressing the needs and rights of marginalized children
National development priority: Governance and Rule of Law

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)/Millennium Declaration
commitment /Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: all

United Nations common
country programme
document (CCPD) outcomes
1.1 Strengthened public
oversight, civil society and
media institutions make
authorities more accountable
to the public, and better able
to enforce gender equality
commitments in planning,
programming and budgeting
processes
1.2 The public administration
has enhanced capacities,
practices and systems to
effectively deliver on
national priorities and
international obligations

UNICEF contributing results;
Medium-term strategic plan (MTSP)
focus area (FA)
 Public oversight bodies related to
children, including Parliament,
Ombudsman, civil society
organizations (CSOs) and media,
increasingly demand accountability
(FA5)

1.3 Government meets
international obligations and
standards for juvenile justice,
managing migration and the
fight against organized crime
and corruption

 Juvenile offenders or victims of
crime are treated in accordance
with international standards (FA5)

 Key policy research and monitoring
institutions effectively manage data
related to children and periodically
report on the situation of
marginalized children,
implementation of child-related
legislation and international
conventions (FA5)

Indicators
(TBD = to be determined)

Partnerships, additional to
United Nations agencies

 Parliamentary hearings on child-related
issues
Baseline: 1 per year; Target: 2 per year
 % of major child-related complaints
handled by Ombudsman addressed
Baseline: TBD; Target: 75%
 % of significant child-related issues raised
by CSOs or media and addressed
Baseline: 0; Target: 75%
 % of regions with functional institutions
that monitor child rights:
Baseline: 10%; Target: 100%
 Periodic reporting on the law on protection
of the rights of the child, National Action
Plan for children, recommendations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child
Baseline: infrequent; Target: annual
reports, or as required.
 % of juvenile offenders diverted
Baseline: 20%; Target: 35%
 Length of pre-trial detention
Baseline: 5–7 months; Target: 3–4 months
 System in place to monitor that child
victims are treated according to standards
Baseline: none; Target: system exists.

European Union,
Organization for Security
and Co-operation in
Europe, the United States,
the United Kingdom and
others support democratic
institutions and rule of law.
UNICEF will add childrelated focus. Includes the
international consortium
for justice reform for which
UNICEF is focal point for
juveniles. Ministries of
Social Affairs, Interior,
Justice, with Institute for
Statistics and regional
councils lead national
efforts. Work with
Parliamentarians,
Ombudsman and local
non-governmental
organizations.

22

UNICEF programme component: Inclusive and protective policies for children

Budget:

Regular resources: $1,450,000
Other resources: $22,000,000
UNICEF-supported result: Children from vulnerable groups are assisted, through specific policy measures and government programmes, to
be healthy and take full advantage of all learning opportunities
National development priority: Social Inclusion and social protection
MDGs 1,2,4,5,6/ Convention on the Rights of the Child articles:
poverty, health, education, protection
United Nations CCPD
UNICEF contributing results;
Indicators
Partnerships, additional to
outcome
MTSP focus area
United Nations agencies
4.1 The rights of
Collaboration among
 Social policy reformed to
 Extent of child poverty
disadvantaged individuals
help children escape poverty
Baseline: 12% of population; Target: 4% of children sector-specific policy
and groups are equally
institutions (e.g., health
(FA5)
 % of municipalities with fully functioning child
ensured through
and education) and social
 Social services protect
protection services
legislation, inclusive
services for disadvantaged
vulnerable children from
Baseline: 40%; Target: 100 %
policies, social protection
abuse and neglect (FA3)
 % of municipalities with unified information systems families will be
mechanisms and special
strengthened. Includes
 Services exist to protect
on violence against children
interventions
work with local
adolescents from harm
Baseline: 0%; Target: 75%
governments and through
(FA3)
 % of youth abusing drugs
several civil society
Baseline: approximately 3,000 problematic users;
organizations. Policy
Target: 1,500
support for social
4.2 Boys and girls over
 Specific government policies  % of children from marginalized groups enrolled in
inclusion will be
the age of 3 (including
ensure marginalized children
preschooling
coordinated also with the
youth), especially from
participate in quality
Baseline: 13% (Roma); Target: 30% (Roma)
Austrian and Swiss
marginalized groups,
preschooling (FA2)
 % of dropouts
development cooperation,
participate in quality
 Specific policies ensure
Baseline for marginalized groups: TBD;
and with the World Bank
education and learning
marginalized children
Target: 50% of baseline
on education and social
opportunities
participate in quality
 primary school children in target areas attaining at
transfers. For
compulsory education (FA2)
least minimum learning achievements
environmental awareness,
Baseline: TBD; Target: 70%
work with a large network
4.3 Health insurance is
 Children and young people
 % of vulnerable children that have access to basic
within civil society will
universal and of quality;
of vulnerable families have
package of health services
continue.
gender-sensitive and ageequal access to health
Baseline: TBD; Target: 80% in target areas
appropriate public health
services, and the health of
 % of vulnerable children covered by preventive
services are available to
young children is monitored
health, including home visits by nurses
all, including at-risk
(FA1)
Baseline: TBD; Target: 80% in target areas
populations
 Children of vulnerable
 % of children stunted under age 5
families receive appropriate
Baseline: 19%; Target: 30% reduction
support for their health and
 Anaemia prevalence in children under age 5
development during their
Baseline: 17%; Target: 30% reduction
early years (FA1)
 % of vulnerable children (0-3) with access to
organized early childhood development
Baseline: TBD; Target: 30%

4.4 All people better
realize fundamental rights
to work and have greater
and inclusive employment
opportunities

 Vulnerable youth have
access to functioning
employment services (FA5)

 % of regions with youth employment services and
skills training programmes
Baseline: 16%; Target: 100%

2.2 National authorities
and institutions, the
private sector and the
general public protect,
preserve and use natural
resources more
sustainably
Cross-sectoral costs

 Children in compulsory
schools act for
environmental protection
(FA2)

 % of students using environmental curriculum
(grades 1 to 5)
Baseline: 20%; Target: 50%

Total:

Budget:

Regular resources: $1,500,000
Other resources:
Regular resources: $3,750,000
Other resources: $27,000,000

