E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Algeria

Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Algeria is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes an aggregate indicative budget of $5,928,000 from regular
resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $8,026,000 in other resources,
subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period 2016 to
2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

1/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

Programme rationale
1. Algeria is an upper-middle-income country, which ranks 93rd out of 187 countries in
the 2014 Human Development Index.1 After a period of slowdown, population growth
accelerated from 2008, bringing the total population to almost 39.1 million people in 2014,2
37 per cent (14.3 million) of them children and adolescents. The urban population represents
85 per cent of the total population.3 This accelerated population growth is likely to continue
in the short and medium term due to an increased fertility rate4 over recent years, currently
resulting in more than 1 million live births per year.
2. Since the country’s independence, the Algerian Government has maintained a firm
commitment to a social contract focused on human development and on significant
investments in the redistribution of national resources. Such commitment translated
throughout the years into wide-ranging social transfer and subsidy schemes that today
represent today more than 25 per cent of government expenditure, as well as through
significant funding for national education (15 per cent of public expenditure) and health (8
per cent). Such investments have had an extremely positive impact on social development,
reflected in the fact that the Government should meet, or even exceed, almost all the
Millennium Development Goals. However, despite significant progress in reducing the
maternal mortality ratio, from 215 to 66.4 per 100,000 live births between 1990 and 2013, 5
the country needs to make further efforts to reach the ratio that would allow it to achieve
Millennium Development Goal 5, which would be 57 per 100,000 live births.
3. Despite the positive results previously mentioned, particularly given the scale of the
underlying logistical and financial challenges to human development in a country that is now
the largest in Africa by area. However, the results hide a more complex social reality, with
substantial disparities in terms of access to and quality of social service provision. These
disparities primarily affect the southern and highland regions, vulnerable populations living
in urban and semi-urban areas, and particular categories of children with specific needs,
especially those with disabilities. The Sahrawi refugees, who have been living in harsh
conditions in the camps around Tindouf (south-west Algeria) for nearly 40 years, are also
considered one of the most vulnerable populations.
4. Such disparities are due to structural factors linked to the country’s geography, as well
as to institutional and sociocultural factors. The fragility of information systems and
monitoring and evaluation systems induces challenges to rational planning and proper
management of mother and child-focused programmes. As a result, the quality and level of
access to social services do not meet the required standards nor do they reflect the depth of
government’s investment in such areas. Despite the country’s large body of statistics on the
situation of mothers and children, the data available are not always broken down by region,
gender or income quintile. However, analysis of administrative statistical data and the 2013
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS 4) results highlight a number of vulnerability
factors specific to mothers and children in various sectors.
5. Significant strengthening of service provision in the health sector, particularly in terms
of infrastructure and facilities, greatly helped national efforts in reducing infant mortality to

1

Human Development Index 2014,
Population of Algeria (National Office of Statistics, ONS).
3
General population census (ONS, 2008).
4
Fertility rate: 3.02 children per woman (ONS, 2014)
5
National administrative data.
2

2/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

21.4 per 1,000 live births6 However, this progress is insufficient in light of the delay in
reducing neonatal mortality, which now accounts for 70 per cent of infant mortality. The
causes include: insufficient integration of care for newborns into pregnancy and childbirth
management; lack of comprehensive perinatal management leading to frequently delayed
transfers in case of complications; and limited neonatal care provision, particularly in terms
of neonatal resuscitation and prevention of avoidable disabilities.
6. Budgetary efforts in the education sector have also served to improve educational
provision, addressing the challenges of providing education for all, meeting Millennium
Development Goal 2 and ensuring a significant increase in access to preparatory education
for children aged 5 to 6 years. In 2012–2013, net attendance in primary education reached
97.4 per cent,7 almost equal for boys and girls, and this draft country programme of
cooperation envisages a range of efforts to ensure that all children attend and remain in school
until the age of 16. In 2014, nearly 494,000 children aged 6 to 16 years did not attend school,8
primarily in disadvantaged regions, large urban centres and deprived families. Furthermore,
a recent study9 of children not attending school and those at risk of dropping out highlighted
that nearly 500,000 pupils may leave the school system without attending secondary
education (lycée). Factors underlying these challenges are: a growing need for continuous,
specialized training for teachers and school principals; a lack of opportunity for reintegration
of out-of-school children into the educational system or for professional training for older
ones; and limited access to preschool education for children aged 3 to 5 years.
7. The country has also made commendable efforts in terms of integrated early childhood
care and development for children aged 0 to 6 years, notably in health care, with measles
vaccination rates above 90 per cent.10 However, progress is still needed in a number of areas.
Today only 25 per cent of babies under 6 months benefit from exclusive breastfeeding,
whereas this proportion was more than 80 per cent at the start of the 1990s,11 and inadequate
feeding practices induce delayed growth in 11.7 per cent of children aged under 5 years
(MICS 4). Although more than 50 per cent of children aged 5 years attend customized
preparatory classes managed by the Ministry of National Education, only 16.6 per cent of
children aged 3 and 4 years attend preschool establishments, with marked inequalities
between regions and between income quintiles. This gap in service provision is caused by
the fragmentation of mandates and interventions within different ministries, as well as by the
challenges arising from the coordination of multisectoral service provision.
8. In the area of child protection, a Bill to improve protection measures for children at risk
and those in conflict with the law was presented to the Council of Ministers in 2014. This
should help to strengthen systemic issues identified in relation to children at risk. Indeed,
children at risk or in conflict with the law remain a major concern, as underlined by the 2014
census by the security services, which listed 6,231 assaults on children, 256 abductions, 14
homicides and 6,836 children in conflict with the law.12 Although the lack of a mechanism
for systematic reporting of cases of violence against children means that a breakdown of data
is not possible, MICS 4 indicates that 86 per cent of children aged 2 to 14 years are victims
of corporal punishment or psychological abuse,13 with no significant differences between

6

MICS 4 (2013).
MICS 4 (2013).
8
Study by the Global Initiative on Out-of-School Children (OOSCI, 2014).
9
Ibid.
10
MICS 4 (2013).
11
Ibid.
12
Directorate General for National Security (DGSN) data (2014).
13
MICS 4 (2013).
7

3/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

regions, social backgrounds or gender. The main challenges for the sector are the need to
strengthen the coherence between intersectoral mechanisms to prevent and report violence
against children, and to consolidate quality standards for case management, prevention and
management of child protection services.
9. The almost 11 million adolescents and young people (aged 15 to 29 years) face many
challenges, often resulting from a difficult transition between school or professional training
and entry into the labour market. Bottlenecks in this sector result in service provision for
young people that does not meet their expectations and a lack of knowledge among
adolescents and young people of their rights and opportunities for constructive participation
in their communities.
10. The Government of Algeria continues to provide substantial social transfers in the form
of subsidies for basic goods and energy products, as well as many non-contributory sectoral
social transfers, which play an important role in supporting the most vulnerable children and
families. However, there are two remaining issues to consider. The first concerns the lack of
consistency in the targeting and management of these transfers, inducing high transaction
costs and a social safety net in need of improvement. The second relates to the unclear
sustainability of these transfers if the reduction in oil prices continues over the medium and
long term. Revenue from oil products represents 70 per cent of government revenue. Such a
reduction in oil prices, if sustained in the long term, could make it difficult to maintain the
subsidies and social transfers at existing levels, and make it harder for the country to
implement the 2012 recommendations from the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The
Committee had recommended increasing social sector budgets, speeding up the review of
sectoral policies and legal and regulatory frameworks that perpetuate discrimination against
children, and adapting the national information system so the data collected would aid
analysis of progress achieved. Other recommendations related to the creation of coordination
mechanisms to strengthen integration between programmes.
11. Children may also be exposed to risks in relation to natural disasters such as earthquakes
and floods. Although Algeria has so far experienced few impacts from climate change, the
country has made considerable efforts to greatly increase its water storage capacity. It has
also introduced risk reduction programmes, in partnership with UNICEF, particularly for
schools located in the areas most at risk.
12. In terms of lessons learned, two strategies implemented as part of the previous
programme of cooperation, 2012–2015, could enlighten and inform implementation choices
for the forthcoming programme. The first was the use of the analysis tool for bottlenecks –
the Monitoring Results for Equity System (MoRES) – in relation to maternal mortality. This
proved a useful aid to developing a national action plan to accelerate the reduction of maternal
mortality. The same approach will be used to carry out an analysis of neonatal mortality, as
part of the forthcoming programme of cooperation. Experience gained through the previous
programme also underlined the importance of advocacy and communication about child
rights to the general public, to encourage ownership and use of child rights and equity
approaches. This type of approach proved particularly successful in the #ENDviolence
campaign, which prompted an instant commitment from the Algerian population and its
Government. The Government subsequently brought the campaign to the United Nations
Human Rights Council in order to champion it in the international arena.
13. In light of the preceding analysis and given the country’s economic status, the
programme of cooperation will focus on areas in which UNICEF has genuine comparative
advantages: the capacity to support partners to effectively address the bottlenecks that
perpetuate disparities between children; and the capacity to produce factual data that can be

4/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

directly used by decision makers and ultimately help partners to translate these data into
policies, strategies and results for children.

Programme priorities and partnerships
14. The country programme 2016–2020 will support the efforts made by the Government
to allow all Algerian children to fully exercise their rights to survival, development,
protection and participation, and to provide them with inclusive, high quality social services
to support them in reaching their full potential. Anticipating a number of themes addressed
by intergovernmental discussions on the Sustainable Development Goals, particular attention
will be given to the collection and analysis of national data that facilitates a better
understanding of the disparities between children and adolescents in inclusive access to high
quality social services, depending on their gender, age, geographical location, disability
status or socio-economic conditions.
15. The content of the country programme is closely aligned with the five-year National
Development Plan’s priority focus areas, as presented to Parliament following the
presidential election in 2014. The country programme’s interventions fall primarily into the
following categories: reform of the major social sectors, efforts to improve funding and
public expenditure in the social sectors, and actions to promote human development through
improving the quality of services in the sectors of education, child protection, social
protection, health care and national solidarity.
16. The content of the country programme is also closely aligned with the Strategic
Cooperation Framework (CdCs) proposed outcomes for 2016–2020, agreed upon by United
Nations agencies and national partners. In particular, the country programme will contribute
to the ‘social development’ related outcome, which states that “by 2020, the population is
provided with improved, inclusive and equitable access to high quality social services.”
Child development and education
17. While Algeria has almost achieved universal attendance in primary education, recent
studies have highlighted that access to early childhood development services for children 05 years old is still limited. They have also shown that the education sector still faces
challenges in attracting and keeping all school-age children in school until the age of 16,
especially in some regions of the country. In light of this context, the “child development and
education” component will contribute to efforts by Algeria to ensure that by 2020, children
aged 0 to 16 years, especially those living in provinces reflecting disparities, have improved
access to high quality maternal and neonatal health services, and equal educational and
developmental opportunities and services. This will be done in close collaboration with the
Ministries of National Education, Health Population and Hospital Reform, Religious Affairs
and Endowments and other actors working in the sector, notably the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World Health Organization.
18. The “integrated early childhood development (IECD)” sub-component will support
efforts made by the country in recent months through the development of the first national
IECD strategy. The first set of interventions will support the country’s commitment to the A
Promise Renewed initiative, by developing a national plan to accelerate a reduction in
neonatal mortality and providing behaviour change communication to improve health and
nutritional care for infants and young children (aged 0–3 years). The second set of
interventions will help to improve access for children aged 3–5 years to quality early
childhood development services, as planned in the latest national strategy. The support will

5/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

notably focus on the development and dissemination of tailored models for preschool care at
the community and decentralized levels.
19. The “out of school children” sub-component will contribute to national efforts to reduce
the incidence of school dropout. It will aim to introduce communication and prevention
strategies to improve access to and retention in school for all school-age Algerian children,
and to limit dropout in order to keep as many children and adolescents as possible in the
educational system until the age of 16.. These interventions will be targeted and will focus
on the provinces with the highest numbers of children out of school. For those who have
dropped out, the programme will work with the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of
Professional Training and Education to strengthen mechanisms for cross-sectoral
coordination, providing the children with new opportunities for reintegration into various
forms of schooling, such as ‘catch up classes’, distance learning and support for vocational
and technical training.
20. The “school governance” sub-component will support national efforts to improve the
institutional environment of the education system, to make education provision more widely
available and to improve access to high quality education through extending decentralization
policies that encourage management and monitoring of data at school level. To this end, the
country programme will support the Ministry of Education in upgrading its statistical
information system to an effective decision-making tool. This will enable local officials to
address school dropout effectively and in real time, and will enable decision makers at the
central and provincial levels to develop and pilot action plans to prevent and combat school
dropout. The country programme will also help the Ministry to promote participatory
governance models involving parent and pupil committees, which will also aim to reduce
violence against and among children.
Child protection and participation
21. The rapid social changes affecting Algerian society (such as accelerated population
growth and urbanization) have made children much more vulnerable to violence and harmful
behaviours. The “child protection and participation” component will support the country’s
efforts to ensure that children and adolescents have equal access to improved protection, in
the form of prevention and management of vulnerability resulting from violence, and ensure
they can actively participate in matters of social and political life that affect them. This
component will be implemented in close collaboration with institutional partners that have
daily involvement in child protection and participation. These will include the Ministries of
National Solidarity, the Interior and Local Government, Family and Women’s Affairs;
Justice; and Youth and Sports, as well as a number of partners from civil society and the
United Nations (the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
22. The “institutional strengthening” sub-component will contribute to national efforts to
improve the institutional environment for child protection, to ensure greater effectiveness of
protection services and better coordination of the accompanying multisectoral response. The
programme will support the relevant ministries in revising the national legal and regulatory
frameworks in order to prioritize the best interests of the child, consistent with the
international commitments made by Algeria. The programme will help the Ministry of
National Solidarity to review the mechanisms for preparing and implementing budgets for
protection services, and to generate knowledge on causes and problems relating to child
protection and the low level of participation by children. It will also help the Ministry to

6/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

improve coordination mechanisms and review systems for collecting and processing
statistical information.
23. The “improving child protection services” sub-component will support national efforts
to improve access to and utilization of cross-sectoral child protection services throughout the
country. The programme will help the Ministries of National Solidarity, Justice and the
Interior to identify good practices in prevention and child protection support systems that
may be extended on a national scale. There will be a particular focus on alternatives to
detention and on mediation practices. There will also be a focus on introducing a referral
system for reporting, and providing a structured and systematic response to violence against
children, as well as on developing and implementing new operational standards for
institutions working with vulnerable or at-risk children. Finally, the programme will support
model interventions designed to give young people opportunities for civic participation.
24. The “social norms and participation” sub-component will contribute to national efforts
to improve the behaviours of communities, families and children, and their awareness of
norms in relation to child protection and the prevention of violence and abuse. Support will
be provided through the following actions: use of behaviour change communication to
eliminate inappropriate practices and to promote positive social norms and practices that
encourage the protection and participation of children and adolescents; increased use of new
technologies to disseminate knowledge in relation to participation and protection, as well as
information about the locations and respective services provided by centres established by
various institutional partners (or by civil society) to meet social demand. The Ministry of
Youth will also be supported to better identify the needs and expectations of young people
regarding the services provided by youth-centred institutions throughout the country, and to
consider participatory management practices that could be adopted to encourage optimal
participation by young people in these centres and, potentially, in their management and daily
programming.
Social inclusion
25. It is vital to pre-empt the budgetary trade-offs that may be detrimental to child-focussed
programmes – especially those benefiting the most disadvantaged children – given
continuing constrained global economic growth and low oil prices that may reduce national
revenue. In order to contain this situation and maintain growth in budgets for social
programmes, the “social inclusion” component will support efforts to institutionalize
mechanisms for identifying inequalities in access to high quality social services for all and
causal links that could explain lasting disparities. This component will also support efforts to
improve targeting mechanisms and the efficiency of social transfers for the most
disadvantaged children, to support more effective social protection. This component will be
implemented in close collaboration with institutional partners that have daily involvement in
child protection and participation. These are the Ministries of National Solidarity, Justice and
the Interior, the National Economic and Social Council (CNES) and a number of partners
from civil society and the United Nations (the International Labour Organization (ILO),
UNFPA and UN-Women).
26. The “social equality” sub-component will support quantitative and qualitative
improvements in the production and dissemination of data, so decision makers can use the
data to revise social development strategies and plans to make them more inclusive and more
supportive of children. Support will be provided to the CNES in launching a national equity
observatory. Algeria will also benefit from technical expertise from Mexico, through a
strengthening of the emerging UNICEF-supported South-South cooperation between the two

7/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

countries. This will involve sharing skills, good practices and proven methodologies for
effective monitoring and evaluation of public policies on society. Other opportunities for
intergovernmental cooperation and exchange may be explored in support of this subcomponent’s objectives.
27. The sub-component “child centred social protection” will support improvements in the
effectiveness and efficiency of existing targeting and social transfers for the most
disadvantaged children. This will include facilitating the sharing of experiences between
national and international bodies in the context of South-South cooperation, in particular
drawing on the experience of Brazil or other relevant country experiences. This component
of the programme will be implemented in collaboration with other United Nations agencies
and multilateral organizations, in particular ILO and the World Bank.
Emergencies and humanitarian situations
28. The country programme will continue work to reduce major risks around school
facilities, aiming to give pupils and teachers a better understanding of protective practices in
the event of an earthquake. UNICEF Algeria will also continue its support for the refugee
populations around Tindouf, in partnership with United Nations agencies, and will help local
partners to provide basic social services in the areas of health, education and protection. There
will be a particular focus on capacity-building for resilience among the targeted beneficiary
populations.
Cross-sectoral component
29. The cross-sectoral component will cover operational costs common to all programmes,
such as rent and travel, and cross-sectoral human resource costs for security and support staff.
30. The country programme will use several strategies to achieve results. Institutional
support, together with the generation of disaggregated data in areas of national solidarity,
neonatal health, education and youth sectors, will build the skills of national partners and
improve the quality of services provided to children. In education, the introduction of new
technologies for information management will enable national and provincial authorities, as
well as school principals, to provide better performance monitoring for the education system
and to be responsive in implementing corrective measures. Drawing on South-South
cooperation in the field of social protection will help to introduce relevant models to the
country, to improve the effectiveness of social transfers targeting children.
31. The programme will be implemented in conjunction with: Ministries of Education,
National Solidarity, Youth, Justice, Health, the Interior, and Religious Affairs, CNES and
various ministerial departments involved in budget planning and mobilization. There will be
strengthened partnerships with Parliament and civil society organizations around child
participation and monitoring of the situation of children. Consideration will also be given to
developing partnerships with bilateral or multilateral agencies working in Algeria, such as
the African Development Bank, the European Commission and the World Bank. Partnerships
with United Nations agencies will be strengthened by capitalizing on programme initiatives
such as combating maternal and infant mortality and monitoring disparities. The emerging
partnership with the private sector will be strengthened around themes such as combating
violence against children and seeking funding to extend activities and projects at the local
level.

8/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child development and education

1 400

5 350

6 750

Child protection and participation

1 828

1 076

2 904

Social inclusion

1 400

1 200

2 600

Cross-sectoral component

1 300

400

1 700

Total

5 928

8 026

13 954

Programme and risk management
32. Under the leadership of the Government and the United Nations Resident Coordinator,
UNICEF Algeria was an active participant in the development of the Strategic Development
Framework 2016–2020, based on elements of the Delivering as One (DaO) approach
(although Algeria is not currently a DaO pilot country). In this context, UNICEF provides
coordination of the social development group. It is anticipated that these working groups will
be institutionalized, becoming a mechanism for monitoring implementation of the CdCs and
a forum that will facilitate synergies and be a catalyst for agencies’ programme interventions.
UNICEF will monitor its implementation as envisaged by the CdCs steering mechanism.
Expected opportunities and risks in relation to the intended impacts of the country
programme
33. Considering its geographic location, two notable risks for Algeria include the everpresent risk of a sudden deterioration in the security or humanitarian situation in the subregion, or the sudden onset of a natural disaster, in particular an earthquake. Either of these
would entail a sudden increase in urgent humanitarian needs. However, Algeria does have
national response bodies with significant capacity. UNICEF Algeria will therefore regularly
review the relevance of its emergency preparedness and response plan, based on the civil
protection response mechanisms prepared by the Algerian authorities.
34. The current budgetary pressure linked to low oil prices, and its impact on national
budget stability, are not a risk to national investments in the social sectors, due to the
country’s significant financial reserves. They, however, represent an opportunity for a
thorough review of the adequacy and efficiency of current social transfers and options to
achieve better targeting of these transfers towards the country’s most vulnerable populations.
35. . To this end, national partners will be closely involved in implementation, results-based
management will be systematically applied, and the aid effectiveness principles outlined in
the Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda for Action will be observed.
36. The programme will also ensure that approaches such as the harmonized approach to
cash transfers, joint monitoring mechanisms and other relevant working groups designed to
increase inter-agency collaboration and effectiveness are applied.
37. Implementation of these measures will be monitored by the UNICEF Algeria country
management team. General coordination will be provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

9/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

UNICEF and its partners will prepare joint workplans, which will be reviewed at technical
meetings and during the mid-term review. Details of the technical arrangements for these
processes are provided in the country programme action plan. The results of these processes
will inform United Nations reviews to assess CdCs implementation.
38. This country programme document outlines the UNICEF contribution to support the
efforts made by Algeria to promote human development while tackling disparities,
discrimination and violence. It details the priority areas chosen for cooperation, focusing on
the most vulnerable children, and the level of technical and financial support needed. It serves
as a core document to allow the Executive Board to assess the expected outcomes of the
cooperation between UNICEF and the Government of Algeria.

Monitoring and evaluation
39. In keeping with CdCs 2016-2020, many elements of this programme are intended to
build national capacity in collection, processing and analysis of statistical data on children in
Algeria. Various intervention strategies will be used such as: use of new technologies to
strengthen management systems in the education sector; greater use MoRES to analyse
bottlenecks in neonatal mortality, and improved effectiveness of child protection services at
the decentralized level; and support for the creation and operation of the planned national
observatory for equity monitoring and the teams responsible for providing the partner
ministries with statistical information on the creation and dissemination of disaggregated
equity-focused data. The next household survey (MICS 6) planned in 2017, will provide an
updated analysis of the situation of children and women.
40. The programmes implemented by UNICEF and its partners will be regularly monitored,
supported by annual reviews of progress and constraints with implementating partners. A
mid-term review, planned for summer of 2018, will also allow UNICEF and the Government
of Algeria to take stock of results achieved, and, if necessary, make adjustments in terms of
expected outcomes and programme priorities. Evaluations of certain elements of the
programme of cooperation will gauge the effectiveness and relevance of the various subprogramme components, for a clearer view of the adjustments needed at mid-term or at the
end of the programme. Three evaluations are planned: (a) effectiveness and relevance of
decentralized preschool provision models; (b) effectiveness and relevance of the social
inclusion programme; and (c) results and actual impact of all UNICEF programmes in
Algeria.

10/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

Annex
Results and resources framework
Algeria – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016–2020
Relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child:
Articles 2-3 6, 8-10, 12, 17, 19, 22, 26-29, 35, 40.
National priorities:
 Advance the quality of human development in the education, training and health sectors, taking into account the rights of poorer people and those with
specific needs.
 Improve access to high quality social services and to social protection, especially for vulnerable groups (women, children, elderly people and children
with disabilities).
CdCs (UNDAF) outcomes involving UNICEF:
The population has improved access to inclusive, equitable, high quality social services by 2020.
Education
1) Rate of early school leaving (children under 16 years): Baseline: 3.7% (girls: 3.1%); Target: 2.7%
2) Success rate at official examinations: Baccalaureate: Baseline: 47.19%; Target: 67%
3) Number of projects including a literacy aspect: Baseline: 1; Target: 3
Health
1) Surveillance system for maternal deaths in place: Baseline: No; Target: Yes
2) Maternal mortality ratio: Baseline: 63.6/100 000; Target: 57/100 000
3) Infant mortality rate: Baseline: 22% (boys: 23.5%; girls: 20.4%); Target: to be confirmed
4) Prevalence of cardiovascular disease: Baseline: 26.1; Target: 20%
Social protection
1) Percentage of beneficiaries removed during review of the register for flat-rate solidarity allowance: Baseline: 56.5%; Target: 20%
UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014-2017 Outcomes:
1. Health
5. Education
6. Child protection
7. Social Inclusion

11/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

UNICEF outcomes

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme outcomes

Child development
and education
Improved care and
learning
opportunities
promoting the
survival,
development and
inclusion of children,
especially those
living in regions with
high inequalities

1) Percentage of children
aged 36 to 59 months
registered with a preschool
learning programme
Baseline:
National: 17%
Central highland regions:
6%

MICS 6

Outcome 1
Children aged 0 to 5
years have better
access to opportunities
for care, survival,
preschool learning and
development.

Quintiles
Poor: 7%
Rich: 31% (national level)
Target: 25% by 2020
2) Neonatal mortality
Baseline: 16/1,000
Central highland regions:
21/1,000

Administrative
data from
Ministry of
National
Education
Out of school
children
initiative
(OOSCI)
micro surveys

Outcome 2
Vulnerable and
excluded children aged
6 to 16 years have
increased support in
terms of access to
education and to high
quality learning and
professional training
opportunities; children
are encouraged to
continue with their
schooling.

Target: 13/1,000
3) Percentage of children
aged 6 to 14 years outside
the school system
Baseline:
3% at primary school level
6.5% at lower secondary
level

12/15

Outcome 3
The Government has
strengthened capacity
to legislate, plan and
budget, to improve the
governance and quality
of educational services

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

 Ministry of
National Education
 Ministry of
National Solidarity
 Ministry of
Professional
Training
 Ministry of Health

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome:
Regular resources (RR)
Other resources (OR)
(In thousands of US
dollars)
RR

OR

Total

1 400

5 350

6 750

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

on a national and local
scale.

Target: less than 2% at
primary level and less than
5% at secondary level
4) Net rate of school
enrolment (6-16 years)
Baseline (MICS 4): 93%
Target: 96%
Child protection
and participation
Strengthened
multisectoral
prevention and
management of cases
of violence against
girls and boys

1) Percentage of children
aged 1 to 14 years who are
victims of violence
Baseline (children aged 2 to
14 years):
National: 86% (boys: 88%;
girls: 85%)
Target: National: 70%
2) Introduction of a
multisectoral1 referral
system in certain
geographical areas
Baseline: none
Target: successful
introduction
3) Institutionalization and
adoption of the young
people's participation
model (youth council)

MICS 6
Administrative
date from
Ministries of
National
Solidarity and
Justice

Outcome 1
The government has
strengthened
commitment and
capacity to legislate,
plan and budget to
extend prevention and
response interventions
in the area of child
protection.

 Ministry of
National Solidarity
 Ministry of Justice
 Ministry of
National Education
 Ministry of Youth

RR

OR

Total

1 828

1 076

2 904

Outcome 2
There are improved
standards for the
management and
quality of prevention
and child protection
services at national and
local levels.
Outcome 3

1

Effective referral system: a system allowing appropriate identification and referral of cases of violence against children, through definition of the roles and
responsibilities of the actors involved, development of standard operating procedures, and creation of referral routes, using training and mentoring.

13/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

Families and
adolescents (both boys
and girls) in the most
affected regions are
better equipped to
participate, to protect
themselves and to
reduce harmful
behaviours.

promoted by UNICEF, in
at least three decentralized
locations
Baseline: none
Target: at least three
recorded mechanisms in
place
4) Introduction of
alternatives to detention
for children in conflict
with the law, in some
geographical areas
(mediation, community
service, parole)
Baseline:
to be confirmed with
qualified representatives of
juvenile justice
Target: alternatives to
detention implemented, in
accordance with relevant
standard operational
procedures and memoranda
of understanding, in the
relevant geographical areas
Social inclusion
An improved policy
environment and
social protection for
disadvantaged and
vulnerable children
and adolescents,
underpinned by
knowledge and data

1) Existence of an
independent body
responsible for monitoring
equality and for analysis of
multidimensional poverty
affecting children.
Baseline: none

MICS 6
Updated
country profile
on equality
National Office
of Statistics

Outcome 1
Strengthened national
capacity and skills for
the creation of
knowledge regarding
social equality and
multidimensional
poverty in children.
Outcome 2

14/15






National
Economic and
Social council
CNES
Ministry of
National
Solidarity
Ministry of
National
Education

1 400

1 200

2 600

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.30

which focus on
equality.

Target: existence of a
functioning observatory for
equality

Strengthened national
capacity for the
adoption of child social
protection measures
which are efficient,
effective, inclusive and
gender sensitive.



Ministry of
Health

Cross-sectoral
component

1 300

400

1 700

Total resources

5 928

8 026

13 954

_______

15/15

