Angola
Country programme document
2015-2019

The draft country programme document for Angola
(E/ICEF/2014/P/L.4) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2014 annual session (3-6 June
2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data †
(2012 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)

5.7/5.6

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

164

Underweight (%, under 5 years, moderate and severe, 2007)

16

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

..

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

450

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2011)

53

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2005)

59

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

91

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

97

Primary school enrolment/attendance (%, net male/female, 2010)

93/78

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2009)

37/27

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years, male/female)

1.9/2.7

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%, 2009)

2.0

Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female, 2001)

22/25

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2001)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

36
35/36, 40/26, 24/53

GNI per capita (US$)

4 580

† More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org.

The situation of children and women
1.
The fast economic growth of Angola has continued over the last five years,
fuelled by its vast reserves of natural resources. Per capita gross national income has
reached $4,580 in 2012 and Angola aims to transition to a middle -income country by
2018. While availability of social sector data remains limited, social indicators are
generally estimated to have substantially improved over the past years, though at a
slower pace than the overall economy. Despite such improvements, the majority of
the population continues to have limited or no access to basic services and disparities,
both in income distribution and access to basic services are a source of concern.
2.
The country continued to make steady improvements in strengthening its
institutions whose functioning had been severely affected by the protracted conflict
that ended in 2002. Despite this progress, weak governance and institutions including
human resource capacity, remain among the greatest challenges to the country’s
harmonious development. Opportunities for children and ci vil society organizations
to participate in decision making processes have slightly improved over time but
remain somewhat constrained.
3.
According to the latest estimates available, 37 per cent of Angolans reported
monthly consumption below the national poverty line of $49 (IBEP 2008/2009). 1
Income poverty is far more severe and widespread in rural areas (58 per cent) than in
__________________
1

2/11

Inquérito Integrado sobre o Bem-Estar da População (IBEP) 2008/2009.

urban areas (19 per cent). Poverty varies substantially across the country, surpassing
50 per cent in the centre-north, east, and centre regions. The age, education level and
employment status of the head of household, along with the number of household
members, strongly correlate with the level of poverty.
4.
Income inequality is a major driver of poverty in Angola. With a Gini coeff icient
estimated at 0.54, Angola ranks as the fifth most unequal country in Africa. The extent
of income inequality among the poor is low (as testified by a severity of poverty index
of just six per cent); this indicates that the determinant of the high Gi ni coefficient in
Angola is mainly “top-down inequality” — high inequality between the non-poor and
the poor.
5.
Close to one third of the total 2014 state budget of $76 billion was allocated to
the social sectors. Nonetheless, overall weak human resource capacity linked to
inefficient spending patterns remain major constraints to accelerating improvement
in equitable access to quality essential services. Furthermore, allocations in social
sectors need to be increasingly in line with stated national develo pment priorities.
6.
While data on child mortality has not been collected in Angola since 2009, the
most recent global estimates indicate that the under-five mortality rate may have
decreased from an estimated 213/1,000 live births in 1990 to 164 per 1,000 live births.
Despite such decrease, Angola still ranks as the country with the second highest
under-five mortality rate worldwide. In rural areas, the under-five mortality rate is
estimated to be 70 per cent higher than in urban areas.
7.
Maternal mortality remains a pressing public health issue in Angola, with
estimates varying between 450 and 1,400 per 100,000 live births. Haemorrhages,
malaria, under nutrition and a lack of access to health care are among the main
determinants of maternal mortality. Less than half of pregnant women undergo four
or more antenatal visits, and only 42 per cent of births occur in a health facility (IBEP
2008/2009).
8.
The prevalence of HIV in Angola is estimated at 2.3 per cent nationally.
Coverage of prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) services remains
low, with only 17 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women currently estimated to be
in treatment to avoid transmission of HIV to the child. Coverage of paediatric
treatment is estimated to be even lower, with just one in ten HIV-positive children
aged 0-14 years currently undergoing antiretroviral therapy (ART).
9.
Access to safe water and sanitation is highly inequitable and coverage in rural
areas is far lower than in urban areas. In the north-eastern provinces, less than
16 per cent of households are estimated to have access to safe water and less than
38 per cent to adequate sanitation. Hygiene and sanitation practices remain poor in
Angola, contributing to high levels of morbidity and mortality.
10. The education sector has seen large investments in infrastructure and a dramatic
increase in enrolment, yet quality is constrained by limited human resource capacity.
The main determinants of education deprivation are related to where the child lives
and the wealth of the household. At the primary level, the gender gap has been closing,
while it remains an issue of concern at the secondary level, particularly in rural areas.
Children in the top wealth quintile are approaching universal education, while the net
attendance rate for children in the poorest households is just 38 per cent. Disabilities
are a further reason of exclusion. The Government’s expressed commitment to cater

3/11

to the special needs of children with disabilities may progressively contribute to
promoting a more inclusive education system.
11. Less than four in every ten Angolan children under the age of five years
(36 per cent) were registered at birth. High costs, distance to the services and parents
without documentation are the main determinants of low levels of registration of
births; 9.5 per cent of Angolan children are orphans, and more than 1 million children
do not live with their biological parents. Traditionally, orphaned children in Angola
live with extended families without any formal legal proceeding or social protection
and assistance providing adequate care and protection. Nationwide, one in every five
Angolan children aged 5 to 14 years is involved in child labour, and this rate rises to
one in every three children in rural areas. Moreover, 16 per cent of these children
never attended school. In the provinces of Cunene and Zaire, close to half of children
in the same age group are estimated to be involved in child labour. In recent years,
child labour in agricultural farms and construction sites has been reported to have
increased.
12. The national legislation calls for a child-friendly justice system (specialized
court, special units at the police stations as well as social services for pr otection and
reintegration) to be established at provincial level; however, such a system only exists
in one of the 18 provinces. Lack of sufficient and qualified service providers capable
of providing basic and essential services throughout the country re mains a major
bottleneck to bringing services to the citizens, particularly in the most excluded rural
areas. The national policy and legal framework has been improving over the past
years. Major developments include the new Constitution that openly recogn izes
human rights and obligations of duty bearers. In 2012, the Parliament approved the
Children’s Act and in 2011 the Domestic Violence Act. A national social assistance
policy was developed in 2013 and is awaiting approval by the Council of Ministers.
Challenges remain in providing adequate human and financial resources and
operational guidelines for the implementation of key policies. The
“11 Commitments for Angolan Children”, adopted in 2007, and monitored by the
National Council for Children, remain the national umbrella for interventions related
to children.
13. Angola is prone to emergencies and natural disasters, such as drought, flooding,
nutritional crises, and disease outbreaks such as cholera and malaria. In 2011, several
of the country provinces experienced less than 60 per cent of the normal rainfall,
leading to a drought that constrained agricultural production and severely affected the
livelihood of an estimated 1,830,000 people. The impact of these emergencies is
exacerbated by the low level of preparedness of public services, communities and
families.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2010-2014
Key results achieved
14. UNICEF provided substantial contributions to strengthening Angola’s national
policy and legal framework and aligning it with international standards. The advocacy
efforts of UNICEF led to the inclusion of the principle of the best interests of the child
in the new Constitution. UNICEF played a pivotal role in the conception and
development of the Children’s Act, which spells out rights and corresponding

4/11

obligations of the State to provide key services to fulfil children’s rights. The
contribution of UNICEF played a crucial role in the development of a national social
assistance policy whose main components are the expansion of social welfare services
and the introduction of cash transfers to vulnerable families. Furthermore, UNICEF
supported the development of the National Environment Sanitation Policy, Policy on
Prevention and Mitigation of the Impact of HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis, the
Domestic Violence Act, and the National Nutrition Strategy. The advocacy efforts of
UNICEF led to the establishment of the national programme granting free birth
registration and identification for all Angolans for a period of three years.
15. Between 2010 and 2013, UNICEF provided vaccines and technical support for
a total of 25 national polio immunization campaigns, e ach of them reaching close to
seven million children under five years, with coverage rates always above 95 per cent.
As a result of these efforts, collaboration with key partners, such as the World Health
Organization, and government support, Angola has be en free from wild polio virus
since July 2011.
16. UNICEF spearheaded a child survival intervention in Angola known as
Revitalization of Health Services, based on the provision of technical and financial
assistance and training at the decentralised level. The model was used by the
Government to enact its financial decentralization policy and to transfer funds directly
to the municipalities in order to implement the model originally introduced by
UNICEF in 16 municipalities. More recently, the UNICEF model served as a basis
for the United States Agency for International Development and European Union in
expanding funding of their joint support to the municipalities in the health sector.
17. The integrated response of the Ministry of Health and UNICEF in the 10
provinces most affected by drought from 2012-2013 resulted in a significant scale-up
of health care access for the affected population. During the period of January to
December 2013, a total of 1,411,562 children under five years were screened for
malnutrition, out of which 70,881 children were treated for severe acute malnutrition
(26,962 at the community level) and 10,411 with complications were treated in
therapeutic feeding centres. Additionally, 65,481 were treated for moderate acute
malnutrition, totalling 136,362 children treated for (severe and moderate) acute
malnutrition.
18. UNICEF partnered with the Ministry of Family and Women and various
Angolan churches, to implement the Family Competencies Programme, a national
behaviour change programme which promotes a holistic approach to child
development and survival, integrating health, protection and education for children
under five years. With UNICEF support, 1,200 volunteers were trained as trainers of
trainers and served as the first layer for cascade training of 9,550 social mobilizers in
52 Angolan municipalities. During 2012 and 2013, the programme reached an
estimated 18,000 families through domestic visits and 134,000 people through
community dialogues and informational meetings. A recently conducted assessment
showed that the programme resulted in improvements in knowledge among the
families counselled by trained mobilizers of high-impact practices for the holistic
development of children under five years. The Ministry has taken ownership of the
programme and is due to independently scale up the initiative with continued but
limited technical support from UNICEF starting in 2015.

5/11

Lessons learned
19. The increasingly limited availability of donor funding in Angola, combined with
considerable increase in the country’s private-sector wealth as a largely untapped
funding and partnership market, led UNICEF to seek more opportunities for private sector engagement. Despite these efforts, the results achieved during the previous
country programme in terms of fundraising, leveraging and partnership with the
private sector were lower than expected. Experience has shown that pursuing one -off,
funding or partnership opportunities through ad hoc proposals is not effective in
harnessing the interest and support of private companies. Instead, successful
engagement needs to rely on longer-term relationship building toward more durable
partnerships that are based on stronger mutual knowledge and understanding of goals
and priorities. An additional constraining factor to increasing private-sector funding
is related to weaknesses in the design and implementation of the regulatory
framework around corporate social responsibility for Angola. By the same token,
there appears to be a need for UNICEF to invest further in fostering a more holistic
view regarding strategic contributions that the private sector can provide to the
country’s development. Building on the results achieved in the country programme,
UNICEF will continue to develop its understanding of the pri vate sector’s rules of
engagement in the area of corporate social responsibility and articulate an engagement
strategy.
20. In the course of the country programme, UNICEF fostered a number of
partnerships between the Government and community-based and civil society
organizations (CBOs/CSOs). This approach has proven effective in designing and
implementing interventions that have achieved sustainable results. Examples of this
approach include the introduction of the Family Competencies Programme. A recent
assessment of the Programme identified the importance of the cooperation forged by
UNICEF between the Government and community and grassroots organizations for
its implementation. Similarly, the design of the new system for community
management of water points is based on a new partnership fostered between local
authorities and civil society. These successful experiences from the country
programme have shown the need to further pursue opportunities to promote
partnerships between the Government and civil society organizations, given that this
management arrangement will allow smoother implementation of programmes on the
ground and sustainable exit strategies. Accordingly, in the new country programme,
field-level interventions will systematically assess the opportunity of initiating or
strengthening the involvement of CBOs and CSOs. One key area where this will be
reinforced is in the child protection system, for which UNICEF will act as convener
between the Government and CSOs, community leaders, the private sector and other
donors; or the involvement of CBOs/CSOs as key players in the operationalization of
the new Social Assistance Policy.

6/11

The country programme, 2015-2019
Summary budget table †
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival and development

6 268 825

19 500 000

25 768 825

Water, sanitation and hygiene

1 979 658

2 400 000

4 379 658

Education

3 202 013

4 180 000

7 382 013

Child protection

3 046 673

15 035 000

18 081 673

Social policy, evaluation and research

2 470 956

27 850 000

30 320 956

Intersectoral (Public Advocacy and
Partnerships, Communication for
Development, Planning and Monitoring)

7 276 787

4 965 000

12 241 787

Cross-sectoral

8 222 588

2 070 000

10 292 588

Total

32 467 500

76 000 000

108 467 500

†

Additional funds may be received through Consolidated Appeals as required.

Preparation process
21. In preparation for the new country programme, UNICEF developed the Angola
Vulnerability Profile, an analytical document which sheds light on the causes and the
extent of vulnerability among Angolan children. UNICEF also played a leading role
in conducting the national consultation that fed into the global post -2015 process. The
national consultation included specific consultations with children and youth,
members of Parliament and civil society representatives. UNICEF also provided
major contributions to the development of the United Nations Common Country
Assessment. Sectoral consultations with the main partners were conducted to inform
priorities of the new country programme. The proposed country programme is fully
in line with the United Nations Partnership Framework for Angola, developed earlier
in the year, which outlines the United Nations contrib ution to the country’s
development agenda.
Programme components and results
22. The overall country programme goal is to support government efforts to reduce
disparities in social indicators with a focus on the child population of Angola. To do
so, the country programme will pursue a systematic focus on interventions that have
shown capacity to benefit the most vulnerable individuals, families and communities.
Over the next five years, the country programme will gear its action towards
improvements in three key areas that have emerged as possibly the most crucial for
the country’s development agenda: (a) substantial decrease in child and maternal
mortality; (b) expansion of birth registration within the civil registration and vital
statistics system; and (c) expansion of large-scale social assistance scheme to
vulnerable families.
23. The country programme will be articulated in five programmes supported by
three units providing intersectoral support, as described hereafter.

7/11

24. Child survival and development. This programme component includes three
subcomponents: health; nutrition; and HIV and AIDS.
25. Health and nutrition. These subcomponents aim at strengthening national and
district-level systems to scale up high-impact interventions that positively affect
maternal, neonatal and child survival and development. They will strengthen the
capacity of health workers and model cost-effective interventions that can save
children’s lives. At the community and household level, behaviour and social change
will be supported to promote effective maternal, newborn and child health care
practices. These subcomponents will seek to achieve the following results: (a) sector
policy and legal framework strengthened and municipalization of health services
supported through evidence-based advocacy and technical assistance; (b) stunting
prevalence among children under five years reduced from 29 per cent to 20 per cent
(c) maternal and neonatal tetanus elimination certified; (d) 95 per cent coverage for
measles, third dose of pentavalent, pneumo-13, and rotavirus vaccines in 133
municipalities; (e) antenatal care (three or more visits) and skille d birth attendance
increased to 90 per cent and 70 per cent respectively; (f) Angola is certified as a
country free from wild polio virus; and (g) vulnerable children and their families have
access to Integrated Community Case Management in 16 municipaliti es.
26. HIV and AIDS. This subcomponent focuses on the expansion and equity of HIV
prevention, PMTCT and paediatric treatment services for children, women and
adolescents most-at-risk at the decentralized levels. This component will contribute
to achieve the following results: (a) uptake and adherence to antiretroviral treatment
(Option B+) through engagement of at least 350 people living with HIV/AIDS in the
delivery of PMTCT services in 161 municipalities; (b) expanded coverage of early
infant diagnostic and paediatric treatment by national partners; (c) Increased number
of most-at-risk adolescents (10-19 years old) with correct knowledge of HIV/AIDS
prevention measures.
27. Water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH). This programme
component focuses on strengthening the WASH legal framework and its
operationalization through national and municipal plans and budgeting. In this
context, support to sector reviews, bottleneck analysis, data collection and monitoring
and evaluation will play a crucial role. It will enhance capacities of the sector’s
institutions and provide access to quality and sustainable WASH services to people
living in the most disadvantaged areas. The component will contribute to achieve the
following results: (a) National Environmental Sanitation policy framework
operationalized; (b) functional country-wide sector management information system;
(c) Increased access to sustainable and safe water and sanitation for 950,000 people
by scaling up innovative approaches, including community-led total sanitation and
sustainability of water facilities in target provinces, particularly those affected by
recurrent emergencies.
28. Education. This programme component will promote interventions that
contribute to increasing equitable access to quality early childhood, primary, firstcycle secondary and second-chance education, while focusing on provision of
technical assistance to the Government in policy formulation and strategic planning.
It will also support the implementation of action plans for early childhood, special
education, education in emergencies, second-chance education and safer schools.
Quality of teaching and learning will be strengthened through the development of
materials for life skills trainings and teacher assessments. The comp onent will

8/11

contribute to achieving the following results: (a) strengthened policy framework in
the education sector through development of the special education and education in
emergency policies, and regulation for the Free Education Policy; (b) quality of
teaching improved through availability and use of quality material for life -skills
training; (c) training materials developed for school committees and directors to
increase their capacity in monitoring school progress and developing school plans.
29. Child protection. This programme component aims at progressively building
an environment where children are equally protected from violence, abuse, neglect
and exploitation. It revolves around two interconnected approaches: strengthening
child protection systems, including emergency preparedness, and bringing about
social change, leading to greater protection of children. Subnational capacity and
delivery of services (social welfare, justice, law enforcement and civil registration)
will be strengthened, including through further harmonization of the normative
framework and enhanced monitoring and evaluation, referral procedures and
coordination mechanisms, as well as workforce strengthening. Positive attitudes and
behaviours of children, families and duty bearers in relation to protection and care of
children will be promoted. It will coordinate an intersectoral initiative on prevention
and response to violence that will strengthen synergies between sectors and create
evidence on drivers of child protection risks. The component will focus on achieving
the following results: (a) 80 per cent of children under five years of age have their
birth registered in the seven target provinces; and (b) improved access and quality of
justice services for children in at least five provinces.
30. Social policy and evaluation. This programme component will be producing
high-quality evidence, including evaluations to support the country programme’s
policy and advocacy work. Analysis will span from social sectors to poverty
reduction, public finance management and climate change, to the role of the private
sector. The component will seek to achieve the following results: (a) quality evidence
generated in strategic areas in support of shaping policies and resources allocation in
key sectors; (b) programming is informed and shaped by the results of high -quality
evaluations and analysis; (c) government-funded social assistance management
structure strengthened and coverage substantially scaled up to progressively reach the
majority of vulnerable families and their children by 2019; and (d) a total of 40,000
vulnerable children benefit from a newly introduced cash transfer programme.
31. Intersectoral. This programme component will provide support to the sectoral
programmes through public advocacy for child rights, strengthening partnerships,
including with the private sector, integrated approaches to addressing issues of
behavioural change, and through planning and monitoring. It consists of three
programme areas and contributes to six outcome results.
32. Public Advocacy and Partnerships. This programme area will focus on
external communication to large audiences on topics related to child survival,
development, protection and participation, increasing visibility of UNICEF in
Angola. It will help consolidate the organization’s positioning as a knowledge hub
and will strengthen and expand partnerships in support of the UNICEF agenda. It will
support the following results: (a) child-rights issues are known and responded to by
leading decision and opinion makers; (b) private-sector organizations are increasingly
aware of their social responsibility for the well-being of children in Angola; and (c)
sufficient resources are generated and leveraged to address child -rights issues in the
country.

9/11

33. Communication for Development. This programme area will aim at
reinforcing and sustaining positive behaviours around key results defined by
programme priorities (child and maternal mortality, birth registration, social
protection) and support the following results: (a) positive behaviours are reinforced
around child and maternal care in development, protection, birth registration and
social inclusion issues; and (b) children’s active participation is reinforced and
strengthened in institutions, civil society and non-governmental organizations and
children’s associations.
34. Planning and Monitoring. This programme area will support the following
result: monitoring systems and tools are tracking progress on key child rights
indicators through regular routine information systems and other data collection
exercises. A key partner in this will be the National Council for Children operating
through its four technical commissions.
35. Cross-sectoral. This programme component includes costs of operations staff
and operating costs related to the management of the country programme, including
its field presence.
Country programme strategies
36. A deliberate focus on reducing disparities will underpin all interventions. This
strategic approach will be implemented across all programmes by prioritizing
interventions with proven capacity to decrease disparities by reaching the most
vulnerable families and children.
37.

A balanced synergy between the following strategies is being pursued:

(a) Evidence-based advocacy to foster and shape national programmes and
policy decisions towards decreasing inequalities in income distribution and social
indicators. Influencing the allocation and use of public resources in such a way that
places vulnerable Angolan families and their children at the centre of the development
agenda can have a large impact due to the very large size of the state budget envelope.
(b) Institutional and human resource capacity development of government and
non-government partners to promote delivery of greater quality services, with a focus
on the decentralized level, will be crucial to removing a major bottleneck to the
development of Angola.
(c) Community mobilization and innovative methods of gender-sensitive
communication will be used to ensure active participation of children, young people
and communities, as well as sustainable behaviour change.
(d) Building on the success of the current country programme, UNICEF will
continue to support models that can be scaled up with domestic resources . Examples
include the setting up of cash transfer programmes and the community-based system
for PMTCT treatment.
(e) Emergency preparedness and response will be mainstreamed in all
programmes and will include strengthening national and local capacity to prepare for
and respond in a timely fashion to emergencies, mitigating the impact of disasters by
fostering family resilience, particularly in the most vulnerable areas.

10/11

Relationship to national priorities and the United Nations Partnership Framework
38. The country programme is fully in line with the Government’s National
Development Plan 2013-2017 and with major national sectoral policies and plans. It
is aligned with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the goals of A World Fit
for Children and other major international frameworks and priorities related to
children and women. The country programme is also fully in line with the broader
United Nations Partnership Framework for Angola, 2014-2018 (UNPAF). The results
will contribute to all seven outcomes of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014 -2017.
Major partnerships
39. The country programme will be implemented in cooperation with the
Government of Angola, building on existing long-established partnerships with
ministries and government institutions at the central and decentralized level. Other
major partners include: (a) United Nations agencies guided by the UNPAF;
(b) Bretton Woods institutions and bilateral partners; (c) international and national
NGOs and CSOs, human rights groups and youth associations; (d) media, national level and subnational-level communication forums for raising awareness on child
rights; and (v) private-sector partnerships aiming at harnessing support to promote
the country’s development.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
40. Monitoring and evaluation of the country programme results will ensure that
initiatives undertaken by the country office contribute to UNPAF outcomes, national
priorities and the goals to be established as part of the post-2015 development agenda.
The Ministry of Planning is the focal point for programme coordination, thus fostering
the alignment of UNICEF actions with the Government’s priorities. The pr ogramme
will be monitored, guided by the five-year results matrix and yearly integrated
monitoring and evaluation plans, to be developed at the beginning of each year and
updated quarterly to track progress towards planned results. Quarterly reviews of
progress in programme implementation will be conducted, based on consultations
with partners. Opportunities for joint monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with
other United Nations agencies will continue to be explored whenever they have the
potential to provide added-value to UNICEF programming. Results achieved and
constraints will be duly documented to serve as lessons learned and best practices. A
midterm review is foreseen halfway through the programme, with the participation of
the full range of partners.

11/11

