Argentina
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Argentina
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.28) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 second regular session (14-16
September 2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 12 January 2010.

Basic data †
(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

12.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

16

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005-2006)

4a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2005)

48 b
99/98

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2004)

87

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

96

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

91

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.5
7a

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2004)
GNI per capita (US$)

6,050

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

96

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

99

†

a
b

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at
www.childinfo.org
Indicates data differ from standard definition.
The estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank is 77 per 100,000
live births, which is adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths.

The situation of children and women
1.
Argentina is a middle-income country with an unequal distribution of
resources and significant disparities in social indicators. The socio -economic
recovery after the 2002 crisis reduced unemployment from 21.5 per cent (2002) to
8.5 per cent (2007) and poverty from 57.5 per cent (2002) to 26.9 per cent (2006).
However, the challenges for achieving the Millennium Development Goals are
significant, given the situation of the poorest urban sectors and the northern regions.
Poverty affects 40.9 per cent of children, and extreme poverty 14.3 per cent.
Children of immigrant families, those who are indigenous, have a disabled family
member or live in marginalized rural areas are at the highest risk.
2.
The achievement of universal access to quality education (Millennium
Development Goal 2) is challenging. Basic education is characterize d by high rates
of enrolment and coverage, but also by high rates of failure, repetition and dropout.
Though enrolment rates for secondary schools are high (86 per cent), completion
rates are low: the national failure rate is 35.5 per cent, reaching a peak of 51.4 per
cent in some provinces. Significant gaps in institutional regulations and capacities
explain limited results in retention and learning achievements. Bilingual
intercultural education is deficient in terms of access and quality. Of the indigeno us
population, 11 per cent are illiterate, 27 per cent have not finished primary school
and 45.8 per cent have not completed secondary school.
3.
Between 1990 and 2007, the under-five mortality rate declined from 29.6 to
15.6 per 1,000 live births, and the infant mortality rate fell from 25.6 to
13.3 per 1,000 live births. However, since 1990, the gap between the provinces with

2

the highest and lowest infant mortality rates has increased. Lack of access to
primary health care, especially in extremely poor co mmunities, and deficient quality
of hospital care are among the main factors contributing to high levels of mortality.
4.
To achieve Millennium Development Goal 5, maternal mortality reduction by
75 per cent from the 1990 rate (52 deaths per 100,000 live births) is needed. This
implies reaching a rate of 13 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births by 2015. Since
1990, the rate has fallen little, to 44 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2007.
Nevertheless, regional disparities remain pronounced — 18 deaths per 100,000 live
births for the city of Buenos Aires, compared to 165 deaths per 100,000 live births
for Jujuy province. Poor planning and management and a paucity of key human
resources where they are most needed are the main reasons for inadequate quality o f
services, which are crucial for combating maternal mortality.
5.
Approximately 70 per cent of pregnant women are tested for HIV, among
which 0.3 per cent are infected. Since 1999, the mother-to-child transmission rate
has decreased regularly, to 0.87 per 10,000 live births in 2005. Access to
antiretroviral and other key drugs, including prophylaxis, is guaranteed. However,
social protection of families and children affected by AIDS needs substantial
improvement.
6.
Argentina established its own Goal 9, aimed at eradicating child labour. A total
of 6.5 per cent of children under 13 years work. Birth registration rates show serious
gaps in the northern provinces, particularly among indigenous children and
migrants. Children who lack birth registration often have more difficulty accessing
social services. Among children under detention in juvenile institutions in 2007,
only 60 per cent had an identification card. Equal access to justice for immigrant
women and their children remains an important challenge.
7.
At the end of 2005, nearly 20,000 children were in institutional care
throughout the country; 87.1 per cent of them were non-penal cases. The number of
adolescents imprisoned for infractions of the law decreased from 2,377 in 2005 to
1,799 in 2007; 81 per cent of those deprived of their liberty were 16 to 17 years old.
A 2007 study of all convicted or presumed juvenile offenders up to age 17 identified
6,294 children. Of these, 1,799 lived in 119 institutions, 39 of which were
non-specialized as juvenile institutions. The remaining 4,495 were participating in
25 open programmes, not all of which were in full compliance with quality
standards for juvenile justice.
8.
Important gaps have been identified in children‟s ability to speak out,
especially among the most marginalized children and adolescents. During 2007,
children were the subject of 26,660 articles in 12 of the most important newspapers,
but they were consulted as sources in only 4.1 per cent of these articles.
9.
Various State and non-State research entities generate relevant analytical
studies. However, the use of evidence-based studies in formulating and evaluating
policies to uphold child rights needs to be strengthened. The attainment of results
for children demands adoption of multi-annual and multisectoral planning
frameworks, based on solid evidence, at the national, provincial and local levels.
10. Social sector public expenditure recovered after the 2002 crisis, reaching
20.8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2006. At that time hea lth
expenditure represented 4.6 per cent of GDP and education 5.1 per cent. Education
spending has increased regularly since 2003, and a national goal was established in

3

2005 to allocate 6 per cent of GDP to education by 2010. The public budget devoted
to children grew 34.4 per cent between 2001 and 2007, when it reached 4.5 per cent
of GDP. The challenge ahead entails ensuring sufficient funding to improve quality
of services and equity across provinces.
11. The process of reforming the legal framework of Argentina in line with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child has accelerated over recent years. New
national laws enacted include the Integral Protection Law N° 26,061, providing a
framework for normative adjustments and public policy developments; Nat ional
Education Law N° 26,206, increasing obligatory education to 13 years; and Law
No. 25,871, aiming to ensure that migrant children can realize their rights as
citizens. In the matter of juvenile justice, a national law in line with the Convention
on the Rights of the Child is still not available.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved
12. The overall results were achieved through partnerships with national
legislative bodies, ministries and social networks. This collaboration led to approval
of the law on Protection of Child Rights (2006), inspired by the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, and other legislative changes at national and provincial levels.
Also in 2006, a new Secretariat for Children and Family was established, which in
2008 took over responsibility for coordination of the 2008 -2016 National Plan of
Action for Children, for which UNICEF is an adviser. Trends in impact indicators
have been positive for infant mortality, child nutrition, mother-to-child transmission
of HIV, deinstitutionalization of children and net education enrolment, but not for
maternal mortality or school dropout.
13. Significant achievements include: (a) the more “concurrent” national and
provincial action, with strengthened decision-making mechanisms by sectoral
“federal councils” involving all the 24 provincial governments; (b) in the northern
provinces, successful innovations supported by UNICEF contributed to effectively
addressing repetition rates in elementary education, holding school-level evaluations
in support of improving education quality, and establishing comprehensive care of
children with disabilities and alternative care of childre n in conflict with the law;
(c) the implementation of justice system practices more attuned to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child through training of judicial officials; and (d) increased
access to relevant information by the poorest families through the training of
community leaders in State-run social compensation programmes.
14. Since 2005, the UNICEF partnership with the National Ministry of Economy
has led to monitoring of public expenditures for children in all 24 provinces. In
2007, spending on children reached a historic peak of $16.5 million. New relevant
knowledge was generated and disseminated through studies and evaluations on early
childhood integrated care services, inclusion and retention of children in school,
indigenous children‟s socio-cultural education, and care practices in the health
system, among other areas.
15. The key result regarding adolescent participation was pursued through four
studies on adolescents‟ opinions, disseminated through the media. Wide-scale

4

exercises were carried out to engage children in discussing child rights issues. T he
“One Minute for my Rights” initiative allowed adolescents in 11 of the poorest
provinces to learn and analyse child rights and express their views.
Lessons learned
16. Important lessons were learned through efforts to gain public attention on
issues such as maternal and neonatal mortality, the rights of indigenous children,
and the need to establish a juvenile justice system consistent with the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Dissemination of relevant and updated information, the use
of assertive communication campaigns, and the strengthening of alliances with key
governmental and civil society entities have been pivotal elements of this strategy.
17. To reduce maternal and neonatal mortality, UNICEF, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Population Fund identified the need to
cooperate on systemic adjustments in planning and managing health services in a
group of provinces, based on the government inputs. This interagency and
participatory approach was crucial for the adoption o f a national plan of action for
reduction of maternal and neonatal mortality that was put in place in 2009.
18. The UNICEF-supported and first-ever analysis of the educational situation in
selected indigenous communities proved to be an effective evidence -based study
and advocacy tool. The analysis contributed to the work of the recently created
Intercultural Bilingual Education Council, which is engaged in improving
educational achievements among indigenous populations. The evidence -based
analysis was disseminated in the national senate.
19. Productive dialogue with the national Government facilitated the compilation,
for the first time, of updated data on the situation of children in conflict with the law
in all provinces. The availability and use of this information has been effective in
achieving consensus on the need to establish a specialized justice system for
adolescents consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
20. In 2008, UNICEF fund-raising efforts generated the greatest amount ever in
Argentina — $5 million. The trend towards regular increases has been achieved
primarily by raising the contributions of the most sustainable funding component:
individuals who make regular contributions (nearly 65,000 people by 2009), not for
specific projects but for the overall country programme. Providing solid information
to donors on UNICEF action in the country is playing a key role in shaping the
UNICEF image, and reinforcing the critical mass of local actors committed to the
fulfilment of child rights and to sustaining this funding trend.

5

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Health and nutrition for women and children

475

8 350

8 825

Inclusion and quality education for children and adolescents

550

12 850

13 400

Child protection

500

6 850

7 350

Monitoring and communication for child rights

725

7 350

8 075

Programme

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

1 500

850

2 350

3 750

36 250

40 000

Preparation process
21. During 2008 UNICEF maintained continuous dialogue with Government
partners on implementation of the main recommendations of the 2007 midterm
review. The role of UNICEF in middle-income countries such as Argentina has been
closely analysed. The Government favours renewed engagement in the country in
selected areas that face gaps regarding two key issues: (a) changing prevalent
attitudes, both institutional and societal, that do not contribute positively to
children‟s well-being; and (b) enhancing the level of services needed to achieve the
universal realization of child rights. Dialogue among UNICEF, the Government and
other United Nations agencies centred on the results to be achieved through the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), which was signed
on 6 October 2009, and the UNICEF-Argentina draft country programme.
Goals, key results and strategies
22. The overall goal of the country programme is “Within the UNDAF, to
contribute to full compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, as
well as to achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in Argentina
regarding all issues related to children and adolescents, with reductions of
disparities by 2015”.
23. The 2010-2014 country programme will contribute to the achievement of the
following key results:
(a) Compared to 1990, maternal mortality rates have declined by three quarters to 13 per 100,000 live births; under-five mortality has been reduced by two
thirds, to 8 deaths per 1,000 live births; and neonatal mortality has fallen by 50 per
cent; and the risk of HIV infection has been reduced among adolescents;
(b) Fulfilment of learning achievements and inclusion of children and
adolescents in the education system have improved at all levels;
(c) Children and adolescents are fully protected against violence, abuse and
exploitation;

6

(d) Children and adolescents are prioritized in public policies in li ne with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child; and children, along with their families and
communities, demand fulfilment of their rights.
24. The country programme has two broad features: (a) a comprehensive
approach, addressing a spectrum of issues, with the objective of maintaining a broad
understanding of the situation of children; and (b) a selective approach, combining
technical assistance, capacity-building and field testing of innovations,
concentrating in areas facing relevant gaps. Maintaining a level of engagement
appropriate for a middle-income country, UNICEF will emphasize monitoring the
Convention and cultural and policy transformations.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
25. The simultaneous preparation of the draft country programme, the first-ever
UNDAF and the United Nations Development Programme ‟s country programme for
2010-2014 has provided an excellent opportunity for an explicit alignment of the
UNICEF country programme with key national priorities.
26. UNICEF participated proactively in the UNDAF preparation process, which
informed the planning of the key results in the country programme. Formulation of
the country programme took into account the priorities identified in 2007 by the
Government to achieve full compliance with the recommendations made in 2002 by
the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Relationship to international priorities
27. The country programme is based on the priorities identified in the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan for 2006-2013, and is particularly focused on issues
faced by children, young people and families in the poorest areas. Across the five
focus areas, many of the key results areas from the medium-term strategic plan are
addressed in the country programme. Support will be given to the monitoring of the
situation of children and women and to the obligation of the State regarding child
rights, with emphasis placed on monitoring maternal mortality, secondary education,
violence on children, children and justice, indigenous children‟s rights, adolescents‟
empowerment, and public budgeting for children.

Programme components
Health and nutrition for women and children
28. The country programme comprises four major components: health and
nutrition for women and children; inclusion and quality education for children and
adolescents; child protection; and monitoring and communication for child rights.
The outcome of the health and nutrition programme expected by 2015 is “highquality services and family care practices in health, nutrition and HIV are delivered
in integrated packages at critical points in the life cycle of mothers and children ”.
Specific results to be expected from the cooperation in 15 priority provinces
include: (1.1) at least 70 per cent of the maternity hospitals with more than 1,000
deliveries per year actively monitor their own quality and improve adherence to
national quality standards; (1.2) families in the poorest communities carry out
effective preventive and care practices for mother and child health, nutrition and

7

psychosocial and cognitive well-being; (1.3) the general public and families demand
more effective health promotion and services and a safe environment; and
(1.4) adolescents in selected municipalities use gender-sensitive prevention
information, services and improved personal skills to protect themselves from
HIV/AIDs.
29. For specific results 1.1, in coordination with WHO and UNFPA, advocacy will
be carried out and technical support provided for implementation of national and
subnational plans; self-evaluation of hospital services for quality improvement; and
monitoring and control of public policies with the collaboration of the State, civil
society organizations and knowledge centres.
30. In connection with specific results 1.1 and 1.3, communication strategies will
be crucial and will include large-scale campaigns on maternal mortality and creating
a safe environment as well as data-driven and evidence-based advocacy on effective
interventions. These strategies will also involve strengthening of family care
practices.
31. With a focus on families in the poorest communities, and especially on
indigenous populations, technical support and capacity-building activities will be
provided to support the design and implementation of loca l action plans tailored to
communities‟ specific primary health care challenges (specific result 1.2).
32. Specific result 1.4 will be pursued by supporting adolescents to engage in
initiatives that contribute to a protective environment and strengthen me asures to
prevent or reduce stigma, discrimination and vulnerabilities associated with high risk behaviours. This will involve working in alliance with local governments and
social networks.
Inclusion and quality education for children and adolescents
33. The expected outcome for the programme is “educational services and friendly
practices have improved the quality and opportunities for access and retention of
children and adolescents in school within the framework of the National Education
Law N°26,206”. The specific results for the programme are: (2.1) the Secondary
School Reform and National Education Law is implemented and fully working, to
ensure full inclusion, completion and improved learning achievements; (2.2) school
quality and performance have improved, and national policies on evaluation and
school self-evaluation are established and applied in 15 priority provi nces;
(2.3) quality standards for early childhood development are established nationally
and implemented in early childhood develop ment services in five provinces,
achieving coverage of 70 per cent; (2.4) secondary schools in 15 provinces have
established mechanisms that promote and facilitate human rights -oriented respectful
relationships and effective participation; and (2.5) nation al and provincial offices of
the Ministry of Education carry out quality intercultural bilingual education for
indigenous children and adolescents in rural communities in five provinces,
achieving access to basic education and completion rates of 90 per ce nt.
34. Activities planned to achieve results 2.1 consist of technical assistance and
advocacy support to the national and provincial levels of the Ministry of Education
and advisory commissions in implementing the Secondary School Reform and
National Education Law. The primary partners will be the National Congress,

8

Ministry of Education, Federal Council of
organizations (NGOs), universities, and the media.

Education,

non-governmental

35. Specific result 2.2 will be reached by advocating for the establis hment of
polices on evaluation, including self-evaluation, for schools and the educational
system. This is aimed at tackling school failure and dropout. Studies, guidelines and
proposals will be developed and disseminated to support good practices. Strateg ic
partners will include national and provincial offices of the Ministry of Education,
NGOs, the media and United Nations agencies.
36. Result 2.3 will be pursued through evidence-based advocacy, studies and
technical assistance to design and test the application of draft standards in services
of five provinces. Strategic partners will be the Ministry of Social Development,
national and provincial Ministry of Education, NGOs and United Nations agencies.
37. Specific result 2.4 will be obtained through evidence-based advocacy,
participation and social mobilization to build friendly environments and
opportunities within the school community. Cooperation will be provided to
generate and strengthen adolescent networks to promote participation. The main
partners will be the Ministry of Education at the national and provincial levels, local
networks, the media and NGOs.
38. Result 2.5 will be pursued through advocacy, technical assistance, social
mobilization and monitoring activities. The national and provincia l advisory
committees on intercultural bilingual education will be supported in developing
policies. The main partners will be indigenous organizations, the Ministry of
Education at national and provincial levels, NGOs, universities, the United Nations
Development Programme, the media and the private sector.
Child protection
39. The expected outcome is that “the rights of children, adolescents and women
are fully protected by coordinated interventions of local protection services,
judiciary systems and families”. Specific results to be expected from the cooperation
in at least 15 provinces include the following: (3.1) local protection services apply
adequate protection measures according to the National Law on Children and
Adolescents‟ Rights; (3.2) child-friendly and gender-appropriate investigations are
routinely carried out for child victims of violence, abuse or exploit ation;
(3.3) specialized local juvenile justice systems apply measures according to
international standards; and (3.4) within intersectoral provincial plans, effective and
adequately funded mechanisms function to prevent and eradicate child labour at the
local level.
40. Specific results 3.1 and 3.2 will be obtained by (a) providing technical
assistance to harmonize provincial laws and regulations with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; (b) training of officials in the justice and local
administration systems on services and justice administratio n; (c) promoting reform
of the institutional care system; and (d) supporting the compilation of disaggregated
data on violence, abuse and exploitation. The main partners will be national and
provincial organizations in the area of justice and human rights, the National
Secretary of Children, Adolescents and the Family; the National Congress and
provincial legislative bodies; universities; NGOs; local protection services and the

9

Niño Sur (Child of the South) Initiative established in the broad framework of t he
political and economic South American alliance of the Southern Common Market
(Mercosur).
41. Specific result 3.3 will be reached through: (a) advocating for legal and
institutional reform in accordance with international standards; (b) providing
technical assistance for implementation of specialized non-custodial measures;
(c) supporting, monitoring and strengthening implementation of diversion
programmes; and (d) generating updated evidence-based knowledge on adolescents
deprived of their liberty. The major partners will be the Ministries of Justice and
Social Development; the National Secretary of Children, Adolescents and the
Family (SENNAF); the National Congress and provincial legislative and judicial
bodies; the general prosecutor; universities; NGOs; and local protection services.
42. Specific result 3.4 will be achieved by supporting implementation of inter sectoral provincial plans of action through strengthening the institutional response
capacity, broadening alliances with the private sector and providing technical
assistance to translate the new legal framework into practice. The main partners will
be the Ministry of Labour, Commission on Eradication of Child Labour,
International Labour Organization, the private sector, universities, and local
protection services.
Monitoring and communication for child rights
43. The expected outcome for the programme is that „Policy makers, society,
media, family and children use improved and relevant knowledge to act, and to
demand that child rights be upheld‟. The programme has two components:
(4.1) communication for child rights, and (4.2) monitoring and evaluation. The
specific results for the first component (4.1) are: (a) families, children and civil
society organizations increasingly demand fulfil ment of the rights of excluded and
vulnerable children; (b) relevant media in the country consistently report on child
rights and rights violations; and (c) decision makers and stakeholders have available
and effectively use high-quality analytical studies addressing gaps in the realization
of child rights. The specific results for the second component (4.2) are:
(a) comprehensive State-run monitoring and evaluation systems are in place and
strengthened at national, provincial and local levels, and they eff ectively support
evidence-based planning and evaluation; and (b) public expenditures for children
are increased, prioritized and more focused to address disparities in the health,
education and protection sectors.
44. The communication for child rights (4.1) will also focus on establishing
partnerships with the Government at all levels, National Congress, civil society
organizations, ombudsman‟s offices and media and opinion leaders. Advocacy
campaigns aligned with programme priorities will target relevant “influencers” and
communities, and public opinion research will be compiled and disseminated.
45. Result 4.1 will be also be pursued through capacity-building strategies for
journalists and advocacy with media companies based on research about media
coverage. The main allies will be national newspapers, broadcast corporations,
journalists, opinion leaders, and national institutions regulating the media, and
members of Parliament.

10

46. Activities planned to achieve result 4.1 include the preparation and
dissemination of studies, evaluations and case studies on relevant good policy
practices for children. Activities also include the development of new outreach
products and the use of new media to share knowledge and broaden partnerships
with civil society groups, acadaemia, the media, and decision makers.
47. Within the second component (4.2), specific results will be obtained by
strengthening the public sector and civil society to ensure that the rights -based
approach is embedded in planning, monitoring and evaluation processes and to
reinforce strategies to assess trends and disparities for policy making. Partnerships
within the UNDAF to establish a common strategy to achieve the Goals will be
strengthened with United Nations agencies, national and provinci al ministries,
universities and independent child rights observatories.
48. Advocating for a more relevant and focused budgeting for children;
strengthening the capacity of civil society to influence social policy; and prioritizing
investment for children will be key strategies for obtaining results on 4.2. Protection
of investment in education will receive special attention in light of expected limits
that are expected to be placed on the planned increase in spending for 2010 as a
result of the current economic situation. The main partners will be the Ministry of
Economy, SENNAF, universities, and independent observatories.
Cross-sectoral costs
49. Cross-sectoral costs cover technical support for several programmes and a
percentage of administrative costs, including those to cover the costs of the
Southern Cone Operation Centre, which is part of the country office structure in
Argentina that also manages key administrative functions of the UNICEF country
offices in Chile and Uruguay.
Major partnerships
50. Close partnerships with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as the coordinating
body, and sectoral ministries will be crucial in all programme strategies.
Partnerships with the judicial and legislative powers will also be strengthened.
Direct engagement will take place with national and provincial levels of government
aimed at capacity-building, with efforts concentrated in provinces with weaker child
indicators. Specifically, the focus will be on the nine northern provinces, certain
areas in Buenos Aires province and, for each of the results planned, an additional
five provinces chosen because of their rankings regarding key indicators. More
focused cooperation with local partners will include support for the local authorities ‟
leadership role for change.
51. Alliances and cooperation will also be strengthened through interaction with
State bodies that have coordination functions involving all provinces. In partnership
with civil society and NGOs, knowledge centres and media, UNICEF will work to
support development of public policies and mechanisms to address gaps in the
situation of children.
52. According to the fundraising plan, nearly 90 per cent of funds from other
resources will be raised within the country, as has been the case for the last three
years of the present cycle. The plan continues the matching of funds with
programme priorities, strategies and various types of cooperation. To this end,

11

dialogue and focused communication strategies will be especially important with
relevant partners. Efforts will be continued to embrace the growing number of
individual contributors, private companies and related networks that show interest in
supporting the country programme.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
53. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out through the integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan for 2010-2014 and will be coordinated with the
UNDAF monitoring tools set up for use beginning in 2010. The Government and
UNICEF will perform an annual joint review and a midterm review (in mid-2012) of
the country programme. Within the UNDAF framework, UNICEF will support
studies and evaluations, promoting the dissemination of regularly updated key data
on achievement of the goals and on social disparities. This will contr ibute to
monitoring of the country‟s compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and other international legal instruments. UNICEF will provide continued
technical assistance to the Government at national and provincial levels to use
DevInfo to strengthen results-based management in public policies.

12

