Azerbaijan
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Azerbaijan
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.2) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 annual session (1-4 June
2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

†

Basic data
(2008 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.7

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

36

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)

8a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2006)

26 b
74/72

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

99

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

78

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

80

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2007)

0.2
7c

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)
GNI per capita (US$)

3 830

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

70

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

66

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
WHO child growth standard.
b
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 82 per 100,000 live births. See
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
c
Indicates data differ from standard definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Azerbaijan has recorded impressive economic growth during the last five
years. The economy grew annually by 20 per cent in real terms, and central
government revenues doubled as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).
Positive growth was even recorded in 2009, despite the economic crisis, although
the growth remains driven mainly by the hydrocarbon sector. The poverty rate had
fallen to 11 per cent by 2009, though this average hides inequalities and shortfalls in
social protection, health and education.
2.
Disparities remain acute. Poverty rates are highest among families with many
children and families with young children, and are higher for those outside Baku.
The Government plans to bring the eligibility level for assistance up to the amount
of the poverty line by 2011 and increase the assistance amount accordingly.
(Currently assistance is only provided for households earning up to 75 per cent of
the minimum subsistence level, even when provided in full.)
3.
Due to the very low share of social sector expenditur e in GDP, the Government
is unable to fulfil all its commitments to children. Government health expenditures
amount to about 1 per cent of GDP. As a result, salaries for health workers are low,
which leads to informal out-of-pocket expenditures by clients of the health system.
These payments constitute a big burden for poor families, particularly those with
children. The Government is planning to establish a health insurance system.

2

4.
There is clear progress in mortality reduction. According to UNICEF data
based on survey results and estimates, the infant mortality rate (IMR) fell from 78
deaths per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 43 in 2004 and to 32 in 2008. According to
official statistics, the IMR amounted to 11.4 in 2008-2009. Discrepancies between
the infant mortality rates based on official statistics and UNICEF data are explained
mainly by the application of the Soviet definition of live birth within the country.
Both sources demonstrated the downward tendency of infant mortality rate. The
Government has initiated health system reforms, but much remains to be done to
increase the quality and accessibility of health services. Home deliveries are higher
among women from lower welfare levels and lower educational levels. One in every
four children under the age of 5 is stunted. More than a third of children and women
are anaemic.
5.
The prevalence of HIV/AIDS is less than 0.2 per cent among the adult
population and still concentrated among certain high-risk groups, mainly
intravenous drug users. A recent surveillance study found that 10 per cent of them
had HIV. There is an urgent need to increase the knowledge level about HIV and
AIDS among the general population, including young people: only 17 per cent of
women and 13 per cent of men have a comprehensive knowledge of HIV
prevention; for people aged 15-24 this figure is only around 5 per cent.
6.
With massive government investment, the education infrastructure is
essentially sound, though the coverage and quality of preschool education remain
challenging: enrolment is only 23 per cent, and attendance is even lower, averaging
10 per cent — 8 per cent for boys and 12 per cent for girls. Discrepancies are wide
between rural and urban areas. The Ministry of Education is undertaking major
reforms, which should raise the quality. It is measured through scores from the
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) and university admission
tests; on the latter, more than three fourths of students (78 per cent of girls and 80
per cent of boys) achieved scores below 300 on a scale of 700 in 2009.
7.
Children who are internally displaced may face extra challenges due to the
poor physical and technical resources available at schools at some centres for
internally displaced persons (IDPs), as noted in Azerbaijan‟s sec ond report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.
8.
Azerbaijan has taken significant steps in child protection reform, linked to a
broader social protection system. Attitudes towards institutionalization of children
have started to change, and the number of children identified as being in institutions
has fallen (from 14,000 in 2008 to 10,000 in 2009). An inter-ministerial team is
working urgently to establish the social worker profession and alternative services
necessary for de-institutionalization. However, another inter-ministerial issue as yet
unresolved is under-registration of births, also identified by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child: 6 per cent of children under five have never been registered. A
juvenile justice system is being established, but important elements remain to be
developed.
9.
Approximately 56,000 children (2 per cent) are registered as having a
disability. Systems to support children with disabilities (and their families) need
improvement, as do general public attitudes towards these children. Only about
6,000 children with disabilities receive education in special schools; 11,000 are
educated at home. Azerbaijan ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities in 2009 and is embarking on pilot projects on inclusive education.

3

10. Reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child highlight the issue of
children working on the street, mainly in Baku. A survey carried out in 2008 showed
that only 35 per cent of these children attended school regularly. All were doing
some form of paid work.
11. The increasing number of child marriages is a concern, with one marriage in
eight involving a girl under the age of 18. A proposed amendment to the Family
Code would increase the marriage age for both women and men to 18 (with fewer
exceptions than before permitting marriage one year younger). This sets a good
standard, but as many child marriages are already unregistered, the main challenge
clearly lies in implementing the law, as well as in changing public attitud es. Child
marriage reduces opportunities for girls to continue education and increases health
risks, which in turn affects the education and health of future generations.
12. Gender-based violence in the home persists, as identified in the 2009
comments on the country report to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women. When asked in the 2006 Demographic and Health
Survey if they agree with at least one reason justifying a husband‟s beating of his
wife, 58 per cent of men agreed with at least one, and a surprisingly high 49 per cent
of women also agreed. Moreover, three fourths of caretakers report having used
psychological or physical punishment to discipline children.
13. The unresolved conflict in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the
Republic of Azerbaijan has displaced a huge number of people. About 10 per cent of
the population of Azerbaijan are internally displaced and refugees. Unemployment
among the internally displaced is widespread, with only a third of this populatio n
from this category being employed, and per-capita income is lower. Despite massive
investment by the Government, people who are internally displaced have less access
to housing than the non-displaced population, with less than half of displaced people
living in decent housing. There are still 360 IDP collective centres (dormitories,
hostels, sanatoriums, unfinished buildings, et cetera), mainly in big cities, serving a
total of 120,000 displaced people. The Government has announced its intention to
spend over $100 million in 2010 on further addressing IDP housing , $15 million of
which have been already allocated for this purpose.
14. Azerbaijan, particularly Baku, is prone to earthquakes and other natural
disasters. The recently established Ministry of Eme rgency Situations has been
actively promoting awareness among the population regarding disaster preparedness
and risk reduction.
15. As highlighted in the concluding observations by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child the second periodical State report, more data are needed to support
policymaking and decision-making. Also needed are more concerted efforts to boost
the participation of women and young people in decision-making, both at family and
societal levels. The country submitted its combined third and fourth periodical
report in late 2009.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved

4

16. Concerted efforts by the programme of cooperation and key partners, both in
support to policy development and communication for development, have achieved
widespread support for child protection reform, with substantial changes taking
place in perceptions and attitudes. There is now a consensus on restructuring the
child protection system, for which the groundwork has been laid. Integration of
child protection components into the local-level social protection system is being
piloted. A master plan of transformation of institutions, based on a detailed mapping
exercise, has been developed and implementation started. The number of children
registered in institutions has fallen significantly, as noted above.
17. Law reform and systems strengthening have enhanced the capability of the
State to fulfil its obligations to children and women. A law on juvenile justice ha s
been drafted, and discussions are under way to integrate juvenile justice into broader
justice sector reform. The State Committee on Family, Women and Children Affairs
was set up in 2006. This central government body regulates and coordinates
implementation of State policy on affairs of family, women and children.
18. A combination of support to policy development and considerable investment
in technical capacity-building has resulted in the adoption of a national policy on
the application of „active learning‟ in the education system. UNICEF close
collaboration with the World Bank in education reform enabled swift scaling up of
earlier pilots to cover the whole country. Active learning was integrated into the
design of the new curriculum and has been introduced to all primary schools,
reaching approximately 238,000 first and second graders.
19. UNICEF facilitated a broad alliance of social partners for elimination of iodine
deficiency disorders, and important progress has been made. An independent
national survey of iodine nutrition undertaken in 2007 concluded that median
urinary iodine levels of school children and pregnant women were within the
optimal range. A new salt plant capable of providing enough iodized salt for the
whole country will open in 2010.
20. The significant evidence generated during the country programme helped to
inform policymaking and stimulate discussion on significant gaps, such as resource
allocation and budgeting for children, child marriages, violence against children,
institutionalization of children, child nutrition and mortality, and children with
disabilities. The 2006 Demographic and Health Survey was the first national sample
survey owned by the Government, so it particularly helped shed light on the long standing debate about the actual level of childhood mortality. The survey also
highlighted disparities and inequalities among various groups in the population.
Lessons learned
21. The work in supporting child protection reform in the country has substantially
contributed to the enhancement of the government capacity to restructure the child
welfare system. However, as shown in the 2007 evaluation of the child welfare
reform project, reform is a complex and long-term process, needing the full
engagement of major stakeholders, the support of the community and the shared
recognition of the rights of children reached by the welfare services, as specified in
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In the initial stages of the reform, it was
difficult to make an impact benefiting children because the structural components of
the system, such as community-based alternative services, had not been
consolidated. Now that the Government and its partners have identified the

5

importance of having such services in place, the State Pro gramme is able to take
steps to ensure correct sequencing in the deinstitutionalization of children.
22. During the previous country programme, the legislation passed was in most
cases exemplary, but implementation at the local level has been a major chall enge.
This calls for functional implementation mechanisms and more attention to local
planning and feedback to link any project modelling work at the local level with
national policymaking.

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

3 250

8 000

11 250

B. Improved attitudes towards
fulfilment of child rights

585

4 000

4 585

Cross-sectoral costs

750

500

1 250

4 585

12 500

17 085

A. Responsive, child-friendly
services

Total

Preparation process
23. The country programme was based on the areas identified and prioritized
jointly by the Government and UNICEF and discussed with local and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs and international development partners.
The process was coordinated with the development of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), for which UNICEF chaired the
Working Group on Social Development and actively participated in the gover nance
working group. The strategy meeting took place earlier than usual, in October 2009.
24. The country programme design was heavily informed by the Situation
Analysis of the Children in Azerbaijan, conducted in 2009, the draft third/fourth
combined report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Common Country
Assessment and the 2009 UNDAF evaluation, as well as reports and studies
conducted by key development agencies, NGOs and research institutes.
Programme component results and strategies
25. The country programme will comprise two mutually reinforcing and
complementing components, which will contribute to the following results:
(a) By 2015, children benefit from more responsive and child -friendly
services, with reduced disparities in outcomes;
(b) By the end of 2015, Azerbaijan advances the fulfilment of key
outstanding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(ref. CRC/G/AZE/CO/2).
26.

6

Indicators for the first result include:

(a) infant mortality is reduced by 30 per cent and regional disparities in key
child health indicators are reduced;
(b)
criteria;

50 per cent of children attend schools that meet child -friendly school

(c) all at-risk children in six pilot districts (8 per cent of children nationally,
and increasingly beyond these districts) are identified and offered at least a
minimum package of support, with reliance on institutional care reduced to levels of
international best practices;
(d) all children in conflict with the law in five pilot districts (6 per cent of
children nationally, and increasingly beyond these districts) benefit from adequate
diversion services and alternative sentences, and all child victims and witnesses are
treated in a child-friendly manner.
27. The second programme component will contribute to increased public support
and responsiveness by the state infrastructure to advance the fulfilment of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, by (a) improving the understanding of the
rights of children among vulnerable groups; (b) enhanc ing capacities of families to
fulfil their parental responsibilities consistent with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child; (c) enabling the consideration of the best interests of the child in
legislative and decision-making processes, including programmes, policies, judicial
and administrative proceedings; and (d) increasing the meaningful participation of
children, civil society and the media in monitoring the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and increasing the children‟s participation in its imp lementation.
28.

The programme strategies include:

(a) Monitoring the situation of children and women through local and
international research institutions, which will also produce evidence for advocacy
and adjustment of the development approaches;
(b) Strengthening capacity in the practice of supportive supervision and in
establishing an effective interface between central ministries and local (district)
administrations;
(c)

Communication for development;

(d) Influencing public and government attitudes towards socially excluded
and vulnerable children and advocacy for increased public spending on social
services;
(e) Reduction of disparities through low-cost, high-impact preventive
interventions and gender mainstreaming;
(f) Documentation of experience and intercountry exchange to strengthen
government knowledge and capacity on service delivery;
(g) Appropriate support being provided to the Government in strengthening
cross-sectoral mechanisms for disaster preparedness and response.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
29. The basis for the UNDAF, and therefore the country programme, is the State
Programme for Poverty Reduction and Sustainable Development. Officially adopted
in 2008, it sets out clear goals and targets for 2008 -2015, aligned with the country‟s
targets for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The country programme

7

matches five of the nine State Programme goals and targets. The previous country
programme supported the development of the State Programme on t he Transfer of
Children from State Institutions to Family Environment (De -institutionalization) and
Alternative Care (2006-2015).
30. The proposed country programme reinforces the UNDAF outcomes on social
development and governance. Due to the small role of the United Nations in
Azerbaijan, there are few areas of overlap conducive to joint programming.
Exceptions to be explored are HIV/AIDS prevention and maternal/child health.
Relationship to international priorities
31. The proposed country programme supports achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the goals and targets of the Millennium Declaration. It
responds to the international commitments made by the Government of Azerbaijan,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Conven tion on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities. Azerbaijan has signed and ratified the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, with which the co untry
programme is also aligned. The programme also reflects the priorities of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013. The focus on reduction of
disparities and reaching the socially excluded and vulnerable will address some
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Programme components
Programme A. Responsive, child-friendly services
32. The country has had very rapid economic growth in recent years, but
investment and development in social sectors have not been able to keep pace. The
situation analysis shows some technical gaps (especially in newer areas such as
social protection) and also systemic issues that need to be addressed. This
programme component therefore addresses social and legal issues for children such
as equitable access to quality services, strengthening and implementing policy and
regulatory frameworks, and making services child friendly and responsive. The
programmatic response takes place in the cross-cutting areas of gender equality and
the empowerment of women, civil society development, and respect for human
rights, as well as sectoral areas.
33. A strong partnership has already been established with Parliament (Milli
Mejlis), and it will be reinforced to address recommendations for preparing and
improving laws, as well as to strengthen advocacy for proper budgetary allocation in
social sectors. Beyond this, the programme will function as a facilitator of civil
society capacity, helping to strengthen the capacity of NGOs to measure
effectiveness of services and use that evidence to advocate for policy changes and
service improvements.
34. Support to knowledge generation will be key for the development and
enhancement of the social protection system, which will complement the work of
the European Union, World Bank and other United Nations agencies. The
programme will support analysis of the impact of poverty reduction efforts on
children and monitor trends in disparities by age, region and sex. Major social
transfer programmes, such as Targeted Social Assistance, will be measured for their
impact on vulnerable families and their children to provide feedback to the

8

Government for appropriate adjustment. The programme will also support the
generation and analysis of high-quality data.
35. Building on analysis undertaken in the current country programme, evidence
of cost-effectiveness of interventions and investments in early childhood will lead to
effective mechanisms for coordination within and between ministries to follow up
on recommendations, especially in nutrition, early stimulation and early childhood
education.
36. To support broad-based policymaking and generate knowledge, the country
programme will support five districts as demonstration models in how to increase
capacity in evidence-based planning, budgeting, supervision and monitoring for
district development plans. This will require high-level commitment and
involvement of line ministries.
37. To provide evidence to reduce disparities in health and nutrition outcomes,
barriers to effective care will be analysed and service quality improved, especially
in neonatal, preventive and community care services, including early detection and
prevention of disability. Jointly with partners, the programme will support the
introduction and implementation of internationally recognized standards for „live
births‟. Support will be provided to develop the policy and regulatory framework to
introduce and strengthen nutrition services for children and pregnant women,
focusing on breastfeeding and promotion of qualit y complementary feeding as well
as anaemia prevention, including through food fortification.
38. Educational outcomes will be improved and disparities reduced through full
implementation of the child-friendly school concepts, including quality standards;
inclusive education; support to parent-teacher associations to increase effective
participation of parents and communities in school management; and the new pre school curriculum (to be introduced in 2013). Educational challenges of internally
displaced children will receive particular attention.
39. The programme will expand establishment of a responsive child protection
system, reforming mechanisms by developing policy and legal frameworks at the
national level and improving decentralized services by iden tifying local needs,
including those resulting from disability. Support will be given to reform national
and local child protection mechanisms and pilot them in six districts; the aim will be
to produce lessons to be shared before nationwide scaling-up. The programme will
assist in developing a specialized system for children in conflict with the law and
for child victims and witnesses of crimes, with particular focus on continuing
reform of the juvenile justice system. Technical assistance will be provided to
counterparts in developing and implementing laws and by-laws and in setting up and
piloting child-friendly justice, law-enforcement and social services, including
diversion, alternatives to sentencing and specialized child police units and court
rooms in five districts, aimed at subsequent scaling-up.
40. This component will be under the leadership of the Deputy Prime Minister.
Partners will include national and international NGOs, the European Union,
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and United States
Agency for International Development (USAID). Regular resources will be used for
staff inputs, basic research and analysis and monitoring. Other resources will be
used for piloting, technical advice and experience-sharing.
Programme B. Improved attitudes towards fulfilment of child rights

9

41. The situation analysis identified the need for a major change of attitude on
issues such as the image of children in society, child marriage, violence against
children and women, children living with disabilities, children working on the street
and other disadvantaged children. It also highlighted an increasing cadre of young
people who have few opportunities for constructive engagement in society,
including limited societal participation by women. Young people have very little
knowledge about HIV and AIDS and are rarely consulted on their views. HIV is
concentrated among intravenous drug users and sex workers in specific locations,
but a large section of young people are particularly at ri sk.
42. To address these and other challenges, a key strategy of the country
programme will be communication for change and development. Partners will
include Parliament, the Government, mass media, other United Nations agencies
and civil society/NGOs. The programme will also work with relevant stakeholders
to implement a comprehensive sectoral action plan at central and local levels.
43. The programme will focus on equipping and empowering adolescents and
young men and women with necessary life skills and supporting the creation of an
environment that encourages their active participation and broadens the scope for
them to express their views. Encouragement will also be given to the development
of values such as peaceful coexistence and to embracing of soc ial and political
diversity inclusive of the marginalized and vulnerable, and an understanding of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. The programme will work with central and
local authorities and communities, and UNICEF will foster increased dialog ue with
adolescents and young people. This component will be intensively implemented in
20 districts (some of which will have a high proportion of internally displaced
people) to establish good practices for further expansion. Adolescents and young
women and men among marginalized and vulnerable groups will be a particular
focus for prevention of HIV and for the provision of knowledge and tools
contributing to healthy lifestyles and practices.
44. The programme will continue working with the office of the Ombudsman to
monitor child rights at national and local levels. It will also continue to expand
national capacity for reporting to Parliament on child rights, including advocating
for assigning that responsibility to a specific official. To ensure sustaina bility and
national capacity to protect and promote child rights, universities and journalist
training institutes will be supported to strengthen child rights reporting, including
preparation of syllabi.
45. The programme will support building consensus and awareness of the
country‟s growing vulnerability to natural and human-caused disasters as well as the
consequences of climate change. It will work with children, young people and
communities to raise awareness about these issues and will support
intragovernmental coordination, planning and response for disaster risk reduction.
46. The Cabinet of Ministers; the State Committee on Family, Women and
Children Affairs; and concerned Government ministries are the major partners for
the “Improve Attitudes to Child‟s Rights” component, under the leadership of the
Deputy Prime Minister. In order to build a solid alliance for children in the country,
Parliament, universities, national NGOs, the European Union, OSCE, USAID and
international NGOs will be close partners. Regular resources will be assigned for
staff inputs, fundamental research and analysis and monitoring work. Other
resources will be needed for large-scale communication efforts, youth outreach and
experience-sharing.

10

Cross-sectoral costs
47. Cross-sectoral costs cover salaries of cross-cutting staff and include travel,
training and equipment as well as operational support for country office
management and administration.
Major partnerships
48. Partnership is both a strategy and a result of the country programme and is
central to the continued work for children in Azerbaijan. UNICEF will work closely
with its government partners, under the leadership of the Deputy Prime Minister: the
intersectoral State Committee on Family, Women and Children Affa irs; Ministries of
Health, Education, Labour and Social Protection of the Population, Youth and Sport,
Interior, Justice, Emergency Situations, and Finance; and the State Statistical
Committee. One innovation will be to establish working relations with cou nty-level
government leaders and the relevant office in the President‟s Administration.
UNICEF will continue its close collaboration with the office of the Ombudsman as
well as NGOs and academic institutions. UNICEF will also continue to build its
good relationship with Parliament.
49. Cooperation will continue with the United Nations Development Programme
on governance and data for decision-making; the United Nations Population Fund
and the World Health Organization on relevant health issues; the United Na tions
High Commissioner for Refugees on all issues related to internally displaced
people; and the World Bank on education and health sector reforms.
50. Given that Azerbaijan is part of the European Neighbourhood Programme,
UNICEF has many areas of collaboration with the European Commission, and this
major partnership will be furthered. Other international partners include OSCE and
the Council of Europe in matters dealing with justice for children; USAID on
inclusive education and health care reform; and international NGOs, principally the
International Save the Children Alliance and World Vision International, in matters
concerning child protection and children with disabilities. Bilateral donors
functioning in Azerbaijan (principally Japan and Norway) wi ll also continue to be
close partners.
51. UNICEF will also continue building partnerships with the media and private
sector. Efforts will be made to increase private sector interest in child rights and
highlight the importance of corporate social responsibility.
52. This programme of cooperation will be monitored as part of UNDAF
monitoring, with sectoral (thematic) reviews fed by individual programme reviews
at year-end. Evaluations will be undertaken at each major milestone to document
successes and challenges, and the reasons for both. A midterm review will be held in
2012, if possible as part of an UNDAF review, to assess progress and adjust
priorities as needed. A new country programme of cooperation will be presented to
the Executive Board in 2015.

11

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
53. The monitoring and evaluation framework of this programme will be
coordinated with the plans of other United Nations agencies and the Government.
Judicious use of evaluations of progress towards implementation of State
programmes will be promoted and necessary capacities developed. UNICEF will
work with the Cabinet of Ministers, Ministry of Economic Development, State
Statistics Committee and line ministries to monitor the indicators outlined in the
State Programmes, particularly in the State Programme for Poverty Reduction and
Sustainable Development. This monitoring will be supported by two household
surveys (such as multiple indicator cluster surveys) to be conducted at the beginning
and end of the country programme. Alongside conventional indicators of human
development, attention will be paid to tracking changes in other important indicators
such as child poverty, PISA scores, the proportion of children in formal care and the
share of children with disabilities in mainstream education. Of particular value will
be the disaggregation of data by sex, place of residence, age and social status of
children.
54. The Cabinet of Ministers will coordinate the country programme and annual
and midterm reviews, while the programme components will be managed by
respective government ministries and committees.

12

