Bangladesh
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Bangladesh
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.14) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

61.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2007)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)

52
41
33/43, 51/26

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported)

194 a,b

Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2008)

85/86

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

55

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

80

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

53

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

<0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

13
10 c
10/10, 13/9, 6/19

GNI per capita (US$)

590

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

94

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

89

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
Bangladesh Maternal Mortality and Health Care Survey (BMMS, 2010).
b
340 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the United Nations
Maternal Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, the World
Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/
maternal_mortality.html.
c
53.6 % of children under five years of age registered (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics,
2009).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The population of Bangladesh — about 150 million people — is likely to
increase by 50 per cent over the next half century, becoming predominantly urban in
three decades. The urban population stands at 41 million people, increasing at 4 per
cent annually. The poor migrate to cities, more in search of economic opp ortunities
than of social services. According to the 2009 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
(MICS), the social indicators of urban slums are worse than those of most rural
areas.
2.
Bangladesh has made good progress in poverty reduction, infant and materna l
mortality reduction, gender equity in the education system up to secondary level,
birth registration and potable water supply; however, major socio -economic
challenges persist.
3.
Forty per cent of Bangladeshi households are poor; over one quarter,
extremely poor. Poverty has a profound impact on the lives of the country ’s
61 million children. Twenty-six million children live below the national poverty
line, typically deprived of four out of seven of the following basic services: water,

2

sanitation, nutrition, education, health, information and shelter. 1 There is a
correlation between social deprivation and income -expenditure poverty.
4.
The latest data indicate that 65 deaths per 1,000 live births occur among
children under 5 years of age, rising to 86 per 1,000 live births among the poorest
income quintile (Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey [BDHS, 2007]).
Acute respiratory infections/pneumonia and diarrhoea remain the major causes of
under-five morbidity and mortality. Over 80 per cent of child ren with diarrhoea
receive oral rehydration therapy, and 24 per cent also receive zinc (BDHS, 2007).
Immunization, control of diarrhoeal diseases as well as vitamin A supplementation,
combined with a reduction in fertility rates and economic and social dev elopment,
have contributed to the decline in child and infant mortality. Neonatal mortality
accounts for 70 per cent of all infant deaths; its decline has been slower than that for
child and infant mortality. Immediate causes include birth asphyxia, infect ions and
low birthweight. Essential newborn care practices among caretakers are still not
widespread.
5.
In addition to deaths caused by infections and under -nutrition, drowning, road
traffic accidents, burns and other injuries cause 38 per cent of deaths of children
aged 1 to 17. With the decline of communicable diseases, the proportion of injury related morbidity and mortality is rising.
6.
The most recent maternal mortality data show a rate of 194 deaths per 100,000
live births (Bangladesh Maternal Mortality Survey, 2010), which represents a 40 per
cent reduction over the last decade. Immediate causes of deaths include
haemorrhage, sepsis, eclampsia, unsafe abortion and obstructed labour.
7.
Only half of mothers receive antenatal care from skilled prov iders. Health care
correlates with household wealth and educational background. Access is lower in
poor urban and rural areas. The major health systems bottlenecks are: lack of access
to health facilities, staff shortages, insufficient supplies, and inadeq uate supervision
and monitoring. Economic barriers hamper the demand for and use of health
services by the poor; lack of knowledge among caregivers is an underlying factor
for this lack of use.
8.
HIV prevalence remains low at 0.1 per cent. However, the population is at risk
because of the proximity of Bangladesh to high-prevalence countries and because
behavioural patterns exist that could fuel an epidemic. Injecting drug use is the
primary factor for the spread of HIV. Another concern is the rising propor tion of
girls and women living with HIV. One contributing cause is the fact that only 16 per
cent of girls and women aged 15 to 24 have comprehensive knowledge of HIV
prevention.
9.
Food security and nutrition are areas requiring further attention. Forty per cent
of the population does not obtain the minimum level of dietary energy, according to
the 2005 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. Forty-three per cent of
children under five are stunted, and 41 per cent are underweight (BDHS, 2007). The
rate of exclusive breastfeeding, at 45 per cent (BDHS, 2007), has been stagnant over
the last 15 years; inadequate feeding and caring practices and food insecurity
contribute to this high rate. Children aged 6 to 23 months have higher rates of
under-nutrition than children aged 24 to 59 months, indicating inadequate feeding
__________________
1

Child Poverty and Disparities in Bangladesh, 2008.

3

practices (Institute of Public Health Nutrition, World Food Programme and
UNICEF-Household Food Security and Nutrition Assessment 2009). Access to food
is hindered by high under-employment and low household incomes, as indicated, for
example, by the fact that child malnutrition is almost twice as high in the poorest
than in the wealthiest quintile (UNICEF, 2009). Anaemia is of concern for all
population groups, particularly pregnant women and children under two
(Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2004).
10. As a result of poverty one fifth of children of primary school age (6-10) never
attend school en making them vulnerable to neglect, violence and exploitation.
Many poor children work: 12.8 per cent of those 5 to 14 years old, according to the
2006 MICS. Almost 15 per cent of urban, and 23 per cent of rural, enterprises
employ child workers. 2 Most employment opportunities for youth remain in the
non-formal sector, and 76 per cent of youth work in agriculture, transport and
production. Only 1 per cent are engaged in technical or vocational training
(Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics report on the Labour Force Survey, 2005-2006).
11. Bangladesh has attained the Millennium Development Goals target for gender
parity in primary and secondary education enrolment. The country is on track to
achieve the targets related to child mortality, halting the spread of malaria and
tuberculosis, and increasing access to safe drinking water. However, MICS 2009
data indicate considerable disparities between and within districts in terms of
achieving the Goals.
12. There is no strong evidence of discrimination against females before puberty;
however, gender bias persists thereafter. The low socio -economic status of women is
reflected in the poor health services provided to them, their inadequate food intake
and their limited decision-making authority. Thirty-nine per cent of girls are married
before the age of 18; in rural areas, some 36 per cent of girls are married before age
15. Early marriage, dowry practices and sexual harassment, as well as violence
against children and women continue because of social acceptance and gender
norms. Social norms perpetuate the practice of child sexual abuse as well as
exploitation and trafficking, and obstruct efforts to raise awareness of HIV and to
ensure children access to services. Because of social norms, both gir ls and boys
rarely have the opportunity to express their opinions or participate in making in
decisions affecting their lives.
13. Frequent flooding, cyclones and droughts affecting large numbers of
households threaten to hinder full achievement of the Mi llennium Development
Goals. Bangladesh ranks as one of the world’s most disaster-prone countries, with
97.1 per cent of its total area and 97.7 per cent of its population at risk of multiple
hazards (World Bank, 2005). The country also has the second -highest absolute and
relative mortality risk for floods (after India). 3 Low elevation, ecosystem decline
and poor governance in urban areas make the population exceptionally vulnerable.
In 2007-2008, two major floods, a cyclone and increased food prices exacerb ated
poverty and food insecurity. The coping strategies of the poor included: reducing
food intake and health expenditures; withdrawing children from school; sending
children to work and placing them into institutions such as orphanages; and taking
__________________
2

3

4

Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (July 2006), Baseline Survey for Determining Hazardous Child
Labour Sectors in Bangladesh. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Dhaka.
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, Risk and Poverty in a Changing Climate,
United Nations, 2009.

on debt. Preparedness for disasters requires decision-making and leadership, roles
from which women are generally excluded.
14. Steps towards Change: The National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty
Reduction II (2009-2011) presents an opportunity for promoting children’s rights.
However, policies and legislation are not always consistent with the principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child or other international standards and they
often lack adequate enforcement mechanisms. The major policy gaps pertain to
justice for children, social welfare and improving the well -being of poor urban
populations.
15. The country faces challenges that impede efforts to address the underlying and
root causes of child poverty. Government structures are centralized, limiting
flexibility to adapt social services to local circumstances and community demand.
Moreover, social norms and behaviours must be changed to enhance access to
services. Social services have achieved improved access but inadequately address
quality and equity. The lack of attention to equity is demonstrated in the fact that
urban working children, children who live or work on the street and orphans, who
are among the most vulnerable children, receive only 0.66 per cent of the social
safety net budget. Without directly targeting the most vulnerable children and their
families, the inter-generational cycle of poverty cannot be broken.
16.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2011
Key results achieved
17. The programme generated a large volume of high-quality equity-focused
analysis pointing to the need to realize the rights of all children in order to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals with equity. Evidence-based advocacy and
programming directly impacted and supported national policies, strategies, plans
and practices across all sectors. Using the MICS 2009 data disaggregated to the subdistrict level and several publications were produced focusing on child poverty,
investing in vulnerable children, understanding urban inequalities, examining the
national budget and providing a perspective on gender equality in Bangladesh. The
analysis was particularly important for development o f a Composite Deprivation
Index based on education, literacy, health and sanitation indicators and which
measured progress across the MDGs. The analysis highlighted the imperative of
reaching urban slum dwellers to accelerate poverty reduction and pointed to the
necessity for the entire United Nations System to target rural sub-districts and
slums. Some evidence highlighted geographic isolation as a more significant factor
in determining vulnerability than governance.
18. Examples of policy change and effective programming based on accumulated
evidence include: models for cash transfer for orphans and vulnerable children;
transformation of institutions housing children in contact/conflict with the law;
alternative education for out-of-school children; school feeding for vulnerable
children in under-performing sub-districts; enhanced quality and access to maternal
and newborn services; and school-level investment plans.

5

19. Tangible results include: an increase in vitamin A coverage from 85 per cent to
96 per cent and an increase in utilization rates in emergency obstetric care from 27
to 47 per cent (Health Management Information System, Directorate General of
Health Services, 2009). The achievement of an 89 per cent immunization rate of
three doses of combined diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus vaccine (Cover age Evaluation
Survey 2010) merited an award from the Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunization. The decline in child mortality merited the UN Millennium
Development Goal 4 award. Today, there are some 20 million people taking action
to improve hygiene and sanitation practices and seeking quality services in health,
water and child protection. Since 2006, the country has seen a fivefold increase in
birth registration. There is also a close alignment of both the Children ’s Act 2010,
approved by the Cabinet, and the National Policy on Children with the Convention
on the Rights of the Child; the government has been supported to develop a
monitoring framework on recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child. Equally important, are more frequent, meaningful interactions of children
with policymakers.
Lessons learned
20. Programming through the equity lens depends upon robust subnational data,
including on slums. Such programming needs to involve government at the initial
stages, emphasize policy and legislative reform, and aim to strengthen government
ownership and institutional capacity.
21. Within the broader context of the Government – Development Partners’ Joint
Cooperation Strategy aimed at enhancing aid effectiveness, a robust United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) process led to agreement on
thematic priorities, geographic targeting and division of labour. Further downstream,
the Reach Every District immunization strategy boosted coverage dramatically, but
the balance between demand creation and the supply side of service delivery is not
easily achieved. Behavioural change strategies aimed at excluded groups need to be
carefully tailored to their specific needs.
22. Another lessons learned is that implementing programmes in most of the 64
districts makes monitoring challenging, disperses efforts as well as resources, and
creates obstacles for inter-sector complementarity and synergy. Working through
local government institutions to improve the quality and outreach of services
requires major investments in capacity development. Non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) are most effective at the community level to enhance
knowledge, change behaviour and social norms, and to improve demand for and
access to services. Strategic partnerships within the United Nations, international
financial institutions and bilateral institutions, and with civil society are essential
for scaling up projects and programmes.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Social services for children and

6

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

54 200

321 000

375 200

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

12 000

2 500

14 500

women
Social policy, planning, monitoring
and evaluation
Advocacy, communication and
partnerships for children

6 500

2 500

9 000

Local capacity-building and
community empowerment

17 500

5 000

22 500

Cross-sectoral costs

22 210

2 000

24 210

112 410

333 000

445 410

Total

Preparation process
23. The midterm review of the country programme (2008) suggested that UNICEF
needed to strengthen partnerships relating to disaster management, Communication
for Development (C4D), governance, capacity-building, and urbanization. The new
programme would need to further emphasize equity, synergy and sustainability. An
important step towards synergy is the convergence strategy, focusing on 20 districts
selected by the United Nations Country Team for the UNDAF 2012-2016 on the
basis of a vulnerability analysis. Alignment to the UNICEF Medium Term Strategic
Plan was integrated as part of the programme design.
24. The Situation Analysis (2009) highlighted capacity gaps and the immediate,
underlying and root causes impeding the realization of child rights and the Child
Poverty and Disparities in Bangladesh (2009) provided additional insights into
issues of equity. The study also clearly linked the deprivation of social services to
income-expenditure poverty, which suggests the need to address poverty.
25. The United Nations Country Team agreed that a full Common Country
Assessment was not required, given the analytical work of the Millennium
Development Goals thematic groups, a series of dialogues with the Government on
the Goals and the Sixth Five-Year Plan. The MDG Bangladesh Progress Report,
2009, largely determined the selection of priorities for the UNDAF, 2012 -2016. The
Strategic Prioritization Retreat of August 2010 produced a clear set of priorities
including gender and the urban poor as well as identification of lead agencies. The
importance of child participation was also factored into the strategic discussions.
Programme and component results and strategies
26. The UNICEF programme is designed to achieve results for the poorest
children, their families and communities, demonstrating the impact of a
complementary, synergistic and inter-sectoral development model to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. The new country programme also seeks to model a
strong and child-sensitive social protection system. In this context, the UNICEF
Social services for children and women programme component contributes to the
UNDAF 2012-2016 pillar on Social Services for Human Development and aims to
ensure more equitable utilization of quality health, nutrition, education and water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services for the most dep rived populations in 20
selected districts and slum areas. It also focuses on social protection policies and

7

services related to abuse, neglect and exploitation. It additionally addresses changes
in behaviour and social norms as well as creation of demand for services. This
component is the key source of evidence for two additional programme components:
social policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation, and advocacy, communication
and partnerships for children. These components complement each other in
collecting, analysing, using, managing and disseminating evidence and knowledge
to help to change policies and laws that protect the rights of the most vulnerable
children.
27. In terms of strategies, UNICEF and the United Nations system agencies will
focus evidence- and knowledge-based advocacy on accelerated efforts needed to
achieve the Goals and to reduce disparities between and within districts. A central
thrust of advocacy will emphasize that addressing issues of equity is far more
effective in reducing poverty than pursuing economic growth alone. It will also
emphasize that the reaching of middle-income status for the country will not
guarantee the realization of the Government’s poverty reduction targets and human
rights.
28. A capacity development framework will serve to strengthen systems at central
and subnational levels, create demand for services and provide humanitarian -related
support. Emphasis will be placed on behaviour and social change. Service delivery
in deprived urban and rural areas will be used to model innovative initiatives that
can be taken to scale and reinforce the linkages between ground level realities and
the upstream policy and legal environment.
29. Risks to be mitigated include potential declining levels of official development
assistance and the likelihood of national resources being directed more towards
building infrastructure than strengthening social services. The pace of the new
programme will depend on the process of devolution to local government and civil
service reform. A UNICEF 2010 risk analysis indicated high -risk factors associated
with the management of supplies, safety and security, and vulnerability to natural
disasters. It was noted that innovative approaches could be piloted with minimum
risk. Factors mitigating risks include a robust UNDAF focused on the most deprived
populations and geographic areas, with a clear division of labour among United
Nations agencies, including disaster risk reduction (DRR) and potential response
through the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Cluster Approach. A cohesive
United Nations action plan and fundraising strategy; persistent evidence -based
advocacy to leverage equitable allocation of government and international financial
institutions’ resources as well as solid UNICEF internal controls mechanism further
mitigate risks. An increase in UNICEF’s human resources structure in the field from
32 to 80 staff is also positive.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
30. The Government’s vision is to achieve middle-income status by 2021, sustain
food self-sufficiency, meet energy and infrastructure demands, achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, and reduce poverty from 40 per cent to 20 per cent
by 2021. The interrelation between this vision, the targets of the Goals and the
UNDAF was carefully designed. The Social Services for Human Development
pillar of the UNDAF is at the heart of national prioritization and covers several
Goals including those elaborated in the Nutrition & Population, Health, as well as
the Education sectors. It is around this pivotal pillar of the UNDAF that the

8

proposed UNICEF-assisted country programme is mainly constructed. In addition to
nutrition, UNICEF has much to contribute to the other mutually reinforcing
priorities of the UNDAF– such as Disaster Risk Reduction, improving the wellbeing of the urban poor and gender equality. This proposed programme grew out of
shared outcomes and collective strategies between the Government and the United
Nations agencies.
32. Subsequent to the Government’s submission of its third and fourth progress
reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2008, an action plan was
developed with UNICEF support to implement some 100 recommendations of the
Committee. This pragmatic child rights framework complements the priorities of the
programme and is specifically tied to the UNDAF pillar on Democratic Governance
and Human Rights.
Relationship to international priorities
33. The Millennium Development Goals are the main driver of the UNDAF, and
by extension, of the proposed Bangladesh-UNICEF programme of cooperation.
Emergency health, nutrition, WASH, education and child protection int erventions
will be integrated within a national Disaster Risk Reduction plan focused on the
establishment of early warning systems, a community awareness that creates a
culture of safety and resilience, and preparedness for effective response. The latter
will be delivered through the cluster approach of the Inter -Agency Standing
Committee, in which UNICEF leads in WASH and nutrition, and co -leads in
education.
34. All areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013, are relevant
to the proposed programme. Despite falling child and maternal mortality figures,
UNICEF needs to support national efforts to sustain capacities and systems relating
to maternal and newborn health. The key result area relating to improving child
nutrition merits special attention. The scale-up of WASH services is required in the
20 convergent districts in a sustainable and equitable fashion. Despite significant
achievements in education, including in gender parity, issues of quality and equity
persist. UNICEF will therefore support efforts to ensure that children in pre-primary
and primary school complete the cycle with nationally defined competencies and
then enrol in secondary education. Despite the low HIV prevalence, UNICEF needs
to support the monitoring of trends and a rigorous prevention agenda. Given the
high levels of exploitation, violence and abuse, child protection remains an ongoing
imperative. The new programme will continue the current programme ’s successful
policy advocacy and coordination of services for both prevention and response
through partnerships.
Programme components
35. The five programme components aim collectively to invest and leverage
resources to reach the poorest, most excluded populations by targeting the
20 convergent districts and urban slums identified by the UNDAF and reduce
growing social and economic disparities. The programme component social services
for children and women comprises six sub-components designed to be
implemented in a geographically targeted, complementary and synergistic manner
for maximum impact. The other four components are all designed to facilitate,

9

support or draw evidence and knowledge from the former to reduce inequalities
while making progress towards the Goals.
36. The social services for children and women component brings together
strategic and interrelated interventions (sub-components) in health, nutrition,
WASH, education, child protection and C4D. Capacity-building of government duty
bearers and facilities will be complemented with interventions to change critical
behaviours and social norms as well as enhance demand for services. It will also
generate the evidence required for knowledge acquisition, analysis and
dissemination as well as advocacy.
37. The health sub-component aims to scale up cost-effective, evidence-based
maternal, newborn and child health interventions along a continuum of care,
including support to injury prevention, in order to accelerate equi table achievement
of Goals 4 and 5. It will strengthen the health system through decentralized
planning, budgeting, implementation and monitoring at district and sub -district
levels, while creating demand for services. Lessons learned will be used to devel op
policies and plans, and to leverage resources. UNICEF will continue to provide
leadership within the sector-wide approach.
38. The nutrition sub-component aims to support government efforts to scale up
nutrition interventions and make progress towards the hunger target in Goal 1. An
overarching multi-sectoral nutrition policy will be developed, and strategic
partnerships established for scaling up preventive nutrition interventions for
adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and children under 2 years of age,
and the treatment of severe acute malnutrition among young children. UNICEF will
facilitate the local production and use of nutrient-rich, ready-to-use therapeutic
foods, especially for the poor.
39. The WASH sub-component aims to support the achievement of Goal 7 targets
by promoting the use of clean toilets and handwashing with soap through the
leveraging of government resources and the promotion of relevant policies. This
will also be accomplished by aiming to reach the poorest households, communities
and child-related institutions in areas prone to floods and cyclones and those
affected by arsenic and salinity and dropping water tables as well as urban slums.
40. The education sub-component aims to support the new national education
policy to achieve Goals 2. Equitable access to quality early learning, including
injury prevention, pre-primary, primary and equivalent non-formal education for
marginalized children aged 5 to 14 will be the main driver of change. Policy support
will be provided to the integration of life skills-based education in the secondary
curriculum. UNICEF will continue to provide leadership in the education sector wide approach to leverage resources for the most marginalized child ren.
41. The child protection sub-component aims to enhance the protective
environment for children and adolescents, particularly females, against violence,
abuse and exploitation by strengthening the national child protection system that
encompass appropriate laws, policies and services, and through social change. With
a focus on prevention, including injury prevention, action will aim to promote
positive behaviour, minimize vulnerability, address known risk factors, and
strengthen children’s and adolescents’ own resilience. Modelling will be used to
build capacity, ensure quality services supported by legal processes, promote
family-based care and gather evidence to influence policy.

10

42. The C4D sub-component aims to support interventions in health, nutrition,
WASH, education and child protection by promoting life-saving, protective
behaviours. C4D will create demand for and improve the quality of services,
promote individual behaviours and collective social norms that improve the social
status of children and address gender discrimination and traditional practices that
hamper the development of children. C4D will support: (a) households to practise
improved parenting skills and child-friendly teaching; (b) the enhanced status and
role of children; (c) the prevention of early marriage; and (d) planning for safe
maternal delivery, hand-washing, protection from injury, disaster preparedness and
HIV/AIDS prevention. C4D will generate evidence to inform national and
subnational policies.
43. The HIV and AIDS response for children will be cross-cutting. Evidence-based
advocacy will leverage resources, facilitate equitable access of children,
adolescents, youth and women to appropriate HIV prevention, treatment an d care
services, and aim to reduce stigma and discrimination.
44. The local capacity-building and community empowerment component aims
to address weak capacity at subnational levels and to seize opportunities offered by
recent (and possible future) efforts at decentralization. The capacity of local
government institutions and civil society and community-based organizations will
be enhanced to ensure inclusive bottom-up participatory planning across the
different programme components in the targeted areas, strengthen coordination
mechanisms and enhance inter-sector synergy.
45. The programme component advocacy, communication and partnerships for
children will promote and protect child rights with the aim of ensuring that children
and women are increasingly consulted, heard and featured at the centre of national
policies and plans. Parliamentarians, civil society organizations and think -tanks will
be engaged, the capacity and awareness of media professionals enhanced, and
initiatives that promote public discourse on children’s and women’s rights
supported.
Major partnerships
46. UNICEF will build on close collaboration with the Government and forge
stronger partnership with local government institutions. Implementation will
continue to require the collective and coordinated actions of multiple civil society
partners to scale up interventions in mother-and-child health, in the area of
therapeutic feeding, and in the strengthening of rural health centres and
communication networks. Partnerships with a large number of local NGOs will
continue in the areas of early learning activities and non-formal education, WASH
and child protection. UNICEF will continue to play a convenor role vis -à-vis several
development partners and NGOs, including some very effective in ternational NGOs,
in addressing specific challenges related to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals as well as humanitarian response.
47. The United Nations System will pursue synergy, shared results, accountability
and joint fundraising. Continued partnerships and substantial support are expected
from donors. Non-earmarked (―other‖) resources will provide UNICEF in
Bangladesh with a high degree of liberty to undertake research, invest in surveys
and develop policy papers to facilitate advocacy.

11

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. Key monitoring indicators are described in the Summary Results Matrix,
which will serve as the five-year database for the integrated monitoring and
evaluation plan (IMEP). The IMEP will incorporate research, monito ring and
evaluation activities, and will be consistent with the UNDAF IMEP.
49. To assess the overall effectiveness and equity focus of the programme,
UNICEF will track changes in the Composite Deprivation Index, which monitors
net attendance ratios in secondary school, sanitation coverage, adult literacy, and
skilled attendance at birth. Districts and sub-districts will continue to be ranked so
that the progress can be assessed in the 20 convergence districts relative to the other
44 districts, or the 66 convergent sub-districts relative to the 415 other sub-districts
and slums. Changes in the standard deviation of specific indicators over time will
also be used to assess progress towards reducing inequalities.
50. UNDAF annual programme reviews, joint United Nations field visits, the
UNICEF midterm review in 2014 and end-of-cycle evaluations in 2016 will monitor
progress at subnational level against planned results, and distil and disseminate
lessons learned. National impact results surveys include MICS in 2012 and 2015;
annual output-focused surveys will be conducted in the 20 convergence districts;
Demographic and Health Surveys are planned for 2011 and 2015; and a Household
Expenditure and Income Survey is planned for 2015.
51. Partnership with the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics will be strengthened. The
integration of DevInfo into the government system for monitoring the Goals will be
supported. Data will be disaggregated by gender, age and other vulnerability factors,
including geographic location.
52. The Ministry of Finance’s Economic Relations Division has the overall
responsibility for the coordination of the UNICEF -assisted programme and will
provide leadership for planning, implementation, monitoring and periodic reviews.

12

