E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Belarus
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Belarus is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $4,465,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $4,000,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016-2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

Programme rationale
1. Belarus is an upper-middle-income country,1 with a population of 9.5 million people,
1.8 million of them children (51 per cent boys, 49 per cent girls). 2 Economic growth has
contributed to a significant reduction in income poverty, while maintaining a relatively high
level of income equality (Gini coefficient 0.275 in 20143), with minor regional disparities.
Out of total households, the share of low-income households with children decreased from
16.1 per cent in 2005 to 7.1 per cent in 2014.4
2. Belarus has achieved most Millennium Development Goals. The country reduced infant
and under-five5 mortality rates, as well as maternal mortality. In 2014, infant mortality was
3.5 deaths per 1,000 live births (3.2 in urban and 4.4 in rural areas) compared with 7.1 in
2005 (6.0 and 10.0, respectively), while under-five mortality was 4.4 deaths per 1,000 live
births (4.0 in urban and 5.6 in rural areas) as compared with 9.3 in 2005 (7.5 and 14.1,
respectively).6 The Government had made concerted efforts to maintain high levels of health
care and immunization coverage and low rates of infant and under-five mortality, and to
increase the survival rate (currently 75 per cent) of babies who are preterm and of low birth
weight.
3. Almost 88 per cent of children 3-5 years old are covered by educational programmes
(89.6 per cent urban, 82.5 per cent rural).7 The country achieved universal primary education,
and progress in expanding women’s participation in decision-making and in promoting
gender equality. From 2005 to 2014, its rank in the Human Development Index improved
from 64 to 53.
4. Belarus experienced two economic crises, in 2009 and 2011, which slowed progress in
poverty reduction. In early 2015, the national currency lost 45 per cent of its value, largely
due to the devaluation of the Russian rouble and decreasing trade with the Russian Federation
and Ukraine. Economic vulnerability is exacerbated by high external public debt and a 16.2
per cent inflation rate (2014).8 Prices continue to increase for food, gas, health care and utility
services, affecting living standards, particularly of families with children. An ageing
population causes rising public pension and health care spending, and a recent “baby boom”
is placing pressure on the preschool system. In addition, in 2014 Belarus received a
significant inflow of people from Ukraine.9
5. In 2014, of all low-income households, some 68 per cent were families with children.10
The risk of poverty is higher for children with two or more siblings, children with disabilities

1

Gross national income per capita was $6,730 in 2013 (Atlas method).
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD.
2
Demographic Yearbook 2013.
3
Government of Belarus, National Statistical Committee, (Belstat).
4
Ibid.
5
In cooperation with the United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, Belarus
authorities and UNICEF re-assessed some national Millennium Development Goal indicators.
Subsequently, it was recommended to base estimates on infant and child mortality from 2005 onwards in
the national registration data.
6
Belstat.
7
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) of the Situation of Children and Women in the Republic of
Belarus (2012).
8
Belarus in figures 2015.
9
In February 2015, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported 80,841
of Ukrainian citizens seeking legal status in Belarus.
10
Ibid.

2/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

(CWD), and children in single-parent households. Families are entitled to child cash benefits,
pensions, targeted in-cash/in-kind social assistance, statutory labour (guarantees and
privileges for people with children), housing, health care and other guarantees and privileges
as well as social services. In the years ahead, Belarus faces the challenge of maintaining a
social protection floor that can ensure accessibility and affordability of education and health
and social protection services for vulnerable families with children.
6. Over 22 per cent of children live in single-parent families, the key determinants being
family breakdown or death of a parent.11 While labour migration, especially to the Russian
Federation, brings in remittances, it also risks family disintegration, with potential negative
impact on children. Alcohol and substance abuse contribute to disruption of families and also
to children’s exposure to neglect and abuse. 12 In 2014, as many as 22,131 children were
recognized as “being in social danger” due to family “dysfunctionality”.13
7. Systemic work is carried out to realize the right of children deprived of parental care to
live in a safe and caring family environment. The share of these children living in residential
care declined between 2005 and 2014, from 41.5 per cent to 19.7 per cent,14 while adoptions,
guardianship, foster families, and family-type children’s homes are increasing: in 2014, 80.3
per cent (17,756) of children without parental care lived in such alternative arrangements.
Progress was achieved in preventing institutionalization of children under three: the number
fell from 1,302 residing in infant homes in 2005 to 716 at end-2014.15 CWD and with special
needs are among the most vulnerable to institutionalization, representing 70 per cent of
children in infant homes and 54 per cent of children in other residential care institutions.
8. Domestic violence is widespread: in 2012, nearly 12 per cent of women aged 15-49 had
experienced violence (physical, emotional, economic or sexual) at the hands of their
husbands/partners.16 Two thirds of children 2-14 years old were subjected to psychological
or physical punishment by adults, 17 with the latter being higher for boys than for girls: 37.2
and 31.4 per cent, respectively.18 The Government, civil society organizations (CSOs) and
United Nations agencies seek to prevent violence and mitigate its consequences.
9. Late identification of at-risk families, lack of family-centred services, high prevalence
of alcohol addiction and social acceptance of corporal punishment are the key bottlenecks to
the realization of the right of children to be protected from violence, neglect and abuse and
to grow up in a safe and caring family environment. 19 The limited capacity of service
providers to detect, report and address cases of abuse and neglect, as well as the weak intersectoral collaboration, leaves many vulnerable families unassisted. The best interests of
children are not always a primary consideration for authorities in deciding on separation of
children from their families, alternative placement arrangements or family dispute resolution.
10. Juvenile offending declined sharply, from 9,096 crimes in 2005 to 2,654 in 2014,20 with
92 per cent of the latter considered “less serious” or “not posing a public danger”. The range

11

MICS 2012.
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_alcohol_report/profiles/blr.pdf.
13
Statistical book, Offences in the Republic of Belarus, 2013.
14
Belstat.
15
Ibid.
16
MICS 2012.
17
Ibid.
18
Ibid.
19
Ibid.
20
Belstat.
12

3/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

of measures not involving deprivation of liberty has increased and now includes educational
measures, deferral of punishment, conditional sentences, and judgments without imposing a
penalty. The proportion of juveniles sentenced to deprivation of liberty decreased from 18.5
per cent in 2007 to 16.4 per cent in 2014.21 However, many children are still being registered
through police inspections dealing with minors (16,900 children in 2014 22) because they have
offended or are considered at risk of offending. This practice uses loose criteria and leads
towards their stigmatization and exclusion.23
11. Compliance with international juvenile justice standards is progressing, but more needs
to be done. The 2012 national study “On the efficiency of preventive work among juvenile
delinquents”, conducted with UNICEF assistance, concluded that the system still places
considerable emphasis on punitive measures. The main bottlenecks to juvenile justice
development include lack of specialization in the judiciary to handle cases involving children,
including child witnesses and victims, insufficient application of restorative mechanisms and
out-of court dispute settlement models, poor use of mediation, and non-existence of the
probation service.
12. It is concerning that in 2014, trauma and other external causes accounted for 25.5 per
cent of deaths of children aged 0-17.24 The fatality rate of boys is double that of girls.
13. Widespread alcohol and drug use poses a great threat to adolescents’ health. While as
many as 15,279 children and adolescents were registered by psychiatrist-narcologists in 2014
because of psychoactive substances use, 25 there is no reliable information on users.
According to the MICS 2012, 15.4 per cent of young women and 12.5 per cent of young men
aged 15-19 reported first consumption of alcohol before they were 15. 26 In 2014, a total of
29 children committed suicide, and 331 attempted suicide. 27 The risk of committing suicide
is higher among young men, while suicide behaviours are twice as high among girls. Unsafe
sexual behaviour often leads to increased risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV, and unwanted pregnancies: 1,323 pregnancies were registered among
children 14-17 years old and 26 per cent were terminated 28 in 2014.
14. The main bottlenecks to reducing such risks for adolescents are stigmatizing attitudes
towards most-at-risk adolescents (MARA) and people living with HIV, insufficient
knowledge and capacity among health and social workers to deal with MARA, lack of selfpreservation skills among adolescents and the absence of positive civic engagement models,
inadequate cooperation of state and non-state actors in providing age-appropriate services for
MARA, and certain cultural beliefs.
15. There were 27,379 CWD (1.6 per cent of the child population) in 2014.29 Families
bringing up CWD are entitled to early interventions, day care, and special education and
rehabilitation services. However, early detection and rehabilitation services for children at
risk of acquiring disability are not uniformly available in rural and small towns. A

21

Ibid.
Ibid.
23
UNICEF, National study on preventive work with children in conflict with the law in the Republic of
Belarus, 2012.
24
Belstat.
25
Ibid.
26
MICS 2012.
27
Belstat.
28
Ibid.
29
Ibid.
22

4/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

determinant analysis, carried out according to the Monitoring of Results for Equity System
(MoRES), showed that the lack of community-based support services prevents families from
keeping children instead of placing them in residential care. Belarus has made significant
progress in integrating children with special needs and disabilities into preschools and regular
schools. However, the shift from integrated classes to inclusive schooling is just beginning.
Children with disabilities still experience stigma and discrimination: more than two thirds of
parents of preschoolers are opposed to their children being co-educated with children with
special needs.30 The barrier-free environment remains underdeveloped, preventing children
with disabilities from full participation in education and socio-economic life.
16. The multi-country evaluation of results of the child care system reform31 concluded that
significant positive impact on the lives of children and their families has been achieved.
However, it recommends to strengthen prevention of family separation focusing on young
children and those with disabilities, to enhance cross-sectoral approaches and a continuum of
standardized quality services for vulnerable families with children.
17. Belstat, with UNICEF support, pursued a systematic approach to generating evidence
on child-related issues. Availability of data improved through the use of MICS 2012,
TransMonEE and DevInfo. Surveys and determinant analyses informed the Government’s
multi-disciplinary plan to prevent child injuries, and the concept for a palliative care system
for children. Despite notable progress, gaps still exist: data are lacking on drug and alcohol
addiction and on Roma children; data on child morbidity and disability are not disaggregated
by age groups; data on children deprived of parental care and in conflict with the law are not
disaggregated by sex; and data on children with disabilities are inconsistent across ministries.
Not all data are accessible to interested parties and the public, while capacity for in-depth
data analysis needs strengthening.

Programme priorities and partnerships
18. The overall goal of the country programme is to support Belarus in closing equity gaps
in the realization of children’s rights and applying the principle of the best interests of the
child in national policy- and decision-making. The focus will be on the most disadvantaged
among young children, CWD, children deprived of parental care, juveniles in conflict and in
contact with the law, children and women survivors of violence, and adolescents.
19. The programme of cooperation will contribute to the priorities identified by the
National Strategy for Sustainable Socio-Economic Development until 2030, the 2012-2016
National Plan of Action on the Improvement of the Situation of Children and Protection of
their Rights, the 2016-2020 National Action Plan on Ensuring Gender Equality, the 20162020 State Programme on HIV Prevention, and the 2014-2018 Inter-sectoral Plan on Child
Injuries Prevention.
20. The programme will support the Government and civil society in implementing the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, 32 the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and of the Universal Periodic Review. It will
provide an enabling environment for the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of

30

UNICEF, Assessment of the needs of families raising children with special needs and disabilities in Belarus,
2013.
31
Multi-country evaluation of results achieved through child care system reform 2005-2012. UNICEF
CEE/CIS Evaluation Report, 2014.
32
The next State party report to the Committee is due in October 2017.

5/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

Persons with Disabilities, and if that is ratified, will support the Government in its
implementation.
21. The cooperation will also contribute to the achievement of the post-2015 Sustainable
Development Goals, in line with UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014-2017. UNICEF will support
five of the nine outcomes under the 2016-2020 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework Strategic Areas: “Inclusive, Responsive and Accountable Governance” and
“Sustainable Human Capital Development: Health, Education, Social Inclusion and
Protection, Comprehensive Post-Chernobyl Development”.
22. The previous programme of cooperation demonstrated that strategic partnerships
remain necessary to improve the relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of reforms.
UNICEF contributed to shaping views and leveraging resources in the best interests of
children. For example, access to respite care services for families with CWD, and to palliative
care for children with life-limiting diseases, increased through CSO engagement. Civil
society involvement in HIV testing and counselling for MARA brought out innovations for
reaching those hard to reach. UNICEF technical advice enabled central and local authorities
to outsource services to CSOs.
23. Partners also learned that it is necessary to explicitly identify and represent vulnerable
children in sector strategies and policies, especially for the allocation of human and financial
resources, development of legislation, standards, and protocols, and results monitoring.
Equally important is promoting a cross-sectoral vision of vulnerable children at policy level.
The implementation of measures to improve adolescents’ health demonstrated the importance
of an integrated approach to age-specific challenges and risky behaviours. Adolescents’
social and psychological problems, lack of meaningful civic engagement, emerging sexual
and reproductive needs, and unfavourable family and social environment have an impact on
adolescents’ behaviour and can put them at risk. These risk factors are interdependent and
need to be simultaneously addressed to achieve positive outcomes and build resilience. The
convening role of UNICEF was recognized during the midterm review as a major asset in
addressing multiple deprivations faced by the most vulnerable children.
24. Key programme strategies will include: making available state-of-the-art international
and national expertise for a child-focused national development agenda, policies and
legislation; forging a strategic partnership and effective mediation between state institutions
and outreach services provided by CSOs; advising on innovations to close data gaps;
generating evidence for informed decision-making; communicating for social change to
promote child-friendly socio-cultural practices and beliefs; modelling innovative solutions
and assessing cost-effective policy options; and providing technical assistance to develop the
capacity of professionals. Programming will be risk-informed and will include aspects of
disaster risk reduction. Foundational normative principles of the human rights-based
approach, gender mainstreaming and environmental sustainability will be applied.
A safe, caring and supportive environment for children
25. This component aims to strengthen systems for resilience and coping mechanisms to
better enable families to provide a safe and supportive environment for their children. This
will reduce vulnerabilities and help to build the capacity of families to address multiple risks
and deprivations, so that children can grow up without violence, neglect and abuse. The
programme will assist the Government to strengthen synergies between education, health,
social protection and law enforcement systems, so as to enable the early identification of
families at risk, immediate response to parental neglect, and prompt assistance that considers

6/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

individual family needs and the best interests of children. Working with CSOs and the private
sector, the programme will focus on strengthening all components of the child protection and
social protection systems: human resources, budgets, laws, standards, governance,
monitoring and service quality.
26. The programme will promote an integrated approach to child development and
continuity of care for children up to eight years of age, with special attention given to the first
three years of life. Together with international development partners and CSOs, the
programme will support young children’s comprehensive development and protection as part
of the National Early Childhood Development policy.
27. To support families to better care for their children, the programme will improve the
quality of home visiting to reach young children at risk, assess their vulnerability to
developmental delays, neglect, maltreatment and institutionalization; and it will link them
with social protection and education systems, so as to enhance early and appropriate
interventions. Using new technologies and communication strategies, UNICEF will promote
behaviours for responsible parenting.
28. The component will develop monitoring instruments for more effective local planning,
with a focus on identifying access barriers to early education services in rural areas and on
making transition to school smoother. To this end, UNICEF will support the regular
assessment of accessibility and quality of early childhood care and educational programmes.
29. Building on the strong Government commitment to keep children out of institutions,
this component will help to further strengthen the integrated system of family support,
prevention of separation of children from their biological families, and development of
substitute family care. Professionalization of case management will remain a priority of
UNICEF contribution. Special efforts will be made to strengthen gate-keeping mechanisms
and foster care for children under three, and the transformation of infant homes into medical
and social services centres for families of CWD. Monitoring the situation of children in
formal care will be strengthened by using internationally recognized and nationally tested
indicators and methods.
30. The programme will promote a culture of zero tolerance towards violence, including
corporal punishment, and support the development of a comprehensive national system to
respond to domestic violence. This will benefit from the experience of UNICEF in working
with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the International Organization for
Migration during the previous programme, in strengthening the capacity of social workers,
healthcare providers, education professionals and police officers to prevent and counteract
domestic violence. It will use a tested model of inter-sectoral collaboration at local level and
continue public awareness campaigns on domestic violence. Following the amendment of the
law “On Basic Activities Aimed at Offence Prevention” to promote protection orders and
assist victims and witnesses, a law on prevention of domestic violence will be developed,
stipulating wider access of survivors to health, legal, psycho-social and community support
services.
Realizing the rights of children with disabilities
31. Children with disabilities face multiple deprivations throughout their lives. This
programme component will assist the Government in transforming and improving services
to make them more accessible to CWD, and it will also strengthen the following areas: the
early detection of developmental delays, health care, rehabilitation, learning, education,
vocational training and social protection. Such services should be inclusive to address the

7/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

specific needs of CWD and to prevent their segregation. UNICEF will work with the
Government to enhance a national system of early detection, intervention and rehabilitation
which also gives parents an active role.
32. Recognizing the burden of injuries and resulting disability, a system of child injury
prevention will be further developed by enhancing coordination among sectors, improving
monitoring and analysis of data, and increasing parents’ knowledge and skills related to safeliving environments.
33. This component will work with the Government and CSOs to ensure greater visibility
for CWD. Discrepancies among data systems on CWD run by education, health and social
protection systems will be addressed. The International Classification of Functioning,
Disability and Health will be integrated into the national health care system and will be
reflected in revised criteria for eligibility of benefits and services.
34. Increasing access to inclusive education close to their homes will prevent CWD from
being separated from their families, give CWD an opportunity to continuously interact with
their peers, and help to build an inclusive society. UNICEF expertise will enable the
development of an inclusive national education system regulatory framework which will set
criteria and standards for inclusive schools and promote inclusive education through
communication, capacity development, technical assistance and leveraging of resources.
35. This component will help the Government to reduce stigmatization of CWD by
supporting positive attitudes towards them, especially in preschools and schools, through
implementation of a comprehensive communication strategy. The programme will work with
civil society and international development partners to promote social inclusion of CWD and
to make them and their parents active agents of social change in this area. UNICEF will
support the health, education, labour and social protection systems in their efforts to shift
from a medical to a social model of disability, and will continue to facilitate the dialogue
between the education sector, other ministries and CSOs. Considering that disability is the
main reason for child’s institutionalization, this programme will link with the first component
above on strengthening family support systems.
An enabling social environment for the resilience and meaningful participation of
adolescents
36. Tackling risk factors and promoting a healthy lifestyle among adolescents will be key
to the reduction of smoking, alcohol abuse, drug use and juvenile delinquency. This
component will support behaviour change aimed at building adolescents’ resilience so that
they can avoid risk factors detrimental to their health. It will help them to avoid becoming in
conflict with the law, while creating an enabling environment for their meaningful
participation in society.
37. In partnership with CSOs, the programme will support ministries to address the needs
and demands of adolescents for mental and reproductive health services. Promotion of HIV
testing and counselling and the institutionalization of HIV express-testing for MARA will
also remain priorities. UNICEF and UNFPA will continue to collaborate on improving the
quality of services provided in Youth-Friendly Health Centres (YFHC) established during
earlier country programmes. The YFHCs certification system will be systematized, and, in
order to ensure that services are tailored to the needs of MARA, the programme will work
with the most disadvantaged adolescents on design, implementation and evaluation of
services. The component will contribute to the integration of youth-friendly principles and
practices into the primary health care system.

8/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

38. Based on the successful experience in modelling youth-friendly health services,
integration of peer education in the secondary education system, and promotion of
counselling for MARA, UNICEF will mobilize expertise to model sustainable youth-friendly
and gender-sensitive psycho-social service delivery, innovation-based social monitoring
tools and healthy lifestyle social networks. To this end, cooperation across sectors and among
governmental and civil society partners will be essential. UNICEF will initiate policy
dialogue and promote the role of CSOs in providing services for MARA.
39. The programme will strengthen the voice of children and adolescents so that they are
heard and their views given due weight and respected systematically in all decisions affecting
them. The development of a conducive environment for meaningful participation will be
given greater priority, together with the development of communication, negotiating and
problem-solving skills of adolescents. Adolescents will be encouraged to help with
monitoring relevant policies and the quality of services.
40. This component will also support the Government in adjusting national legislation so
that it conforms to international standards in relation to children in conflict with the law and
to the United Nations common approach to justice for children. UNICEF will contribute to
further specialization in the justice system, expanding the range of alternatives to deprivation
of liberty, and to the introduction of mediation and probation services for children in conflict
with the law. CSOs will be valuable partners within local communities for rehabilitation work
with children in conflict with the law, child victims and witnesses of crimes. The programme
will support the introduction of specialized child-friendly procedures for interviewing
children in civil, administrative and criminal procedures. UNICEF will also provide technical
support for the reintegration of children who have committed an offense, while in detention
or in alternative programmes and after the sentence or measure has ended.
Monitoring, knowledge generation and alliance-building for child rights
41. This programme complements the other components in that it seeks to strengthen the
country’s capacity to monitor child rights, analyse the situation of children and undertake
evidence-based actions that are focused on the most disadvantaged children and supported
by adequate budgeting, monitoring systems and results assessment tools. To facilitate
knowledge generation, UNICEF will invest in research, paying due attention to the interests,
concerns and participation of key Government ministries and CSOs.
42. The component will invest in harmonizing social statistics on children across sectors
and ministries. It will support Belarus to have, by 2020, an innovative data portal on key
child-related statistics that is aligned with international standards and methodologies in data
collection and analysis. UNICEF will facilitate the access of national partners to expertise
and innovations to better harmonize current datasets. The aim is to have a user-friendly, realtime child rights monitoring and reporting system to better identify and address inequalities.
43. The programme will work with CSOs to promote stronger and more meaningful
mechanisms for monitoring children’s rights and complaints, in line with the Principles
relating to the Status of National Institutions (the Paris Principles) adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993. Opportunities will be pursued for
stakeholders to learn internationally recognized best practice, including the establishment of
an ombudsperson for children’s rights. The component will also support relevant
Government institutions and CSOs to develop systems for following up on the Concluding
Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and incorporate the adopted new
measures and their monitoring into national plans and programmes.

9/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

44. As development is increasingly driven by local communities and governments, this
component will continue to support the scaling up of the Child-Friendly City initiative in
Belarus, aimed at creating an environment conducive to children’s participation and
enhancing effectiveness of local planning and budgeting. The programme will support
analysis of budget allocations and local spending. UNICEF will strive to create consensus
around the benefit of investing more resources in children, using the central and local
government budgets as tools, in order to achieve sustainable equitable progress in the
realization of children’s rights.
45. Alliances with civil society will be critical to engage the public in the progressive
realization of children’s rights. UNICEF will increasingly facilitate partnering with new
actors in the fields of technology and social media to reach wider audiences, including
Parliamentarians, academic and research institutions, youth organizations, associations of
parents, celebrities and media. UNICEF will work with partners to explore involving the
private sector more closely in corporate social responsibility, in line with Children’s Rights
and Business Principles, promoting the prioritization of child rights among private companies
and seeking their support. Sensitization will take place on key priorities, such as child rights,
CWD and positive parenting.
46. The country programme will contribute to strengthening cooperation with international
development partners to place children’s rights at the top of their agenda for Belarus.
UNICEF will support the evaluation and documentation of good practices and lessons learned
in Belarus, as a contribution to the realization of children’s rights beyond Belarus borders. It
will also promote cooperation with other countries, between institutions and among experts.
Opportunities for subregional programmes will be explored with neighbouring countries.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component
A safe, caring and supportive environment
for children

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

1 210

1 000

2 210

884

1 200

2 084

An enabling social environment for the
resilience and meaningful participation of
adolescents

1 233

1 300

2 533

Monitoring, knowledge generation and
alliance-building for child rights

1 138

500

1 638

4 465

4 000

8 465

Realizing the rights of children with
disabilities

Total

Programme and risk management
47. The CPD outlines the UNICEF contributions to national results for children. It serves
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers
at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to the country programmes are

10/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures, and the
internal controls framework.
48. The main risk to achieving the planned results is linked to the uncertainty of having
adequate resources, especially in an environment of austerity following the recent economic
downturn in Belarus. UNICEF aims to leverage resources for children by strengthening
partnerships with multiple civil society and private stakeholders and international
development partners.
49. Together with other United Nations agencies, UNICEF will be conscientious in its
implementation of the policy on the harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) and will
prepare and implement HACT assurance plans. The business continuity and riskmanagement plans will be updated. Emergency preparedness is a management priority.

Monitoring and evaluation
50. The improvement of child rights monitoring will continue to be a high priority. In close
collaboration with the Government, the monitoring of bottlenecks will be intensified,
building on the successful introduction of the determinant-analysis methodology during the
preparation of the 2014 Situation Analysis.
51. The findings of research, surveys and evaluations will feed into midyear and annual
reviews, gender and thematic assessments, and situation analysis updates. In line with the
guiding principles of the UNICEF Evaluation Policy, the programme will use standards of
the United Nations Evaluation Group for evaluations of national programmes and strategies
regarding cost-effectiveness, relevance and added value for vulnerable children. Key
evaluations will assess the effectiveness of youth-friendly health services, the child injuries
prevention system and the early childhood development and better parenting initiatives.

11/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

Annex
Results and resources framework
Belarus-UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: 6, 12, 14 (2), 15, 18, 19, 23, 24, 26 (1), 27, 28, 29, 33, 37, 39, 40, 42
National priorities: National Strategy of Sustainable Socio-Economic Development until 2030, National Plan of Action on the Improvement of the Situation
of Children and Protection of their Rights for 2012-2016, the 2016-2020 National Action Plan on Ensuring Gender Equality, the 2016-2020 State Programme
on HIV Prevention, and the 2014-2018 Inter-sectoral Plan on Child Injuries Prevention.
Sustainable Development Goals:33
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) outcomes involving UNICEF:
By 2020, effective partnerships are strengthened between the state, civil society and private sector that ensure reconciliation of their interests
By 2020, state institutions have enhanced capacity for responsive, accountable and transparent governance to enable citizens to benefit from all human rights
in line with international principles and standards
By 2020, key populations will have universal access to integrated services for the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care of major communicable diseases
(HIV, TB)
By 2020, vulnerable groups and the population at large have equal access to quality health, education and social protection services that effectively address
their needs
By 2020, the system of ensuring life safety of children and adults is significantly enhanced
Outcome indicators:
Proportion of HIV-infected children born to HIV-infected mothers
Proportion of young men and women (aged 14–18), including adolescents from risk groups, using youth-friendly health centre services
Number of pregnancies (live births and abortions) per 1,000 women aged 15-19

33

Sustainable Development Goals and targets available at http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/focussdgs.html.

12/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

Ratio of children without parental support who have been placed in institutions to those placed in family care
Mortality among children aged 0-17 from external causes (per 100,000 child population)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s):
Improved/equitable use of high-impact maternal and child health interventions from pregnancy to adolescence and promotion of healthy behaviours
Improved and equitable use of proven HIV prevention and treatment interventions by children, pregnant women and adolescents
Improved learning outcomes, equitable inclusive education
Improved/equitable prevention of and response to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect of children
Improved policy environment and systems for disadvantaged/excluded children, guided by improved knowledge/data
UNICEF outcomes Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

By 2020 families’
resilience and
coping
mechanisms are
strengthened and
parents know
about the
importance of the
early years

% of children U3 with access to
early education services in urban
and rural areas
Baseline: 41/19% (2014)
Target: 50/30% (2020)

Means of
verification

Ministry of
Education
(MoE) data

By 2020:
National Early Childhood
Development Strategy and
Action plan operational
Normative framework of
home visiting system
improved;

% of mothers and fathers of
young children (0-6) practicing
responsible parenting
Baseline: TBD (2016)
Target: TBD

Survey

% of children U3 without
parental care who have been
placed in residential care
Baseline: 41.6% (2014)
Target: 20.0% (2020)

MoE data

% of cases of violence against
children that are annually
reported

Indicative country
programme outputs

Gate-keeping mechanism in
place to prevent children,
particularly U3, from
institutionalization;

Ministry of
Interior (MoI),
MoE data

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

Parliament, MoE,
Ministry of Health,
MoI, Ministry of
Labour and Social
Protection, Ministry
of Information,
Belstat,
local governments,
civil society
organizations, United
Nations agencies

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome
RR

OR

Total

1 210

1 000

2 210

Local support mechanism
exists to provide childfriendly services to survivors
or witnesses of violence;
Monitoring system exists for
utilization of education,
health and social protection

13/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

By 2020 all
children with
disabilities (CWD)
and special needs
and their families
receive adequate
quality integrated
services

Baseline: only investigated
crimes against children – 7,043
(2014)
Target: 100% (2020)

services by low-income
families with children

% of districts with health care
MoH data
facilities providing standard early
intervention services to children
U3 with special needs
Baseline: 28.8 % (2012)
Target: 70 % (2020)

By 2020:
National system of early
childhood interventions
services is enhanced

Coverage of CWD with inclusive
education (UNDAF)
Baseline: 70% of CWD enrolled
in regular preschools and schools
(2014)
Target: 80% (2020)
% parents and teachers with
positive attitudes to inclusion of
CWD in general schools
Baseline: TBD (2015)
Target: TBD

By 2020
adolescents and
young people
benefit from
improved social
policies and
systems to reduce
risks affecting
their health and

14/15

% of adolescent boys and girls
(14-19) practicing safe
behaviour
Baseline: TBD (2016)
Target: TBD

MoE data

As in outcome 1
plus Ministry for
Emergency

884

1 200

2 084

1 233

1 300

2 533

International Classification
of Functioning, Disability
and Health integrated into
health care system
Parents’ knowledge on
creation of safe living
environment enhanced
Multi-sectoral unified
database on CWD is set up

Evaluation of
integrated
assistance to
children with
special needs
and disabilities
(0-18) (2015)
KAP survey on
adolescents’
healthy life
style and safe
behaviour
(2016, 2019)
Supreme Court

By 2020,
Youth-friendly health
services certified
System of psycho-social
rehabilitation for young
addicts operational

As in outcome 1 plus
Ministry of Justice
and Supreme Court

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.13

development, and
are empowered for
meaningful
participation

% of convicted juveniles who
benefit from restorative
alternative measures
Baseline: 55% (2014)
Target: 70% (2020)
% of cities with institutionalized
mechanisms for participation of
adolescents in decision-making
Baseline: 19.5% (2014)
Target: 50 % (2020)

By 2020, the
national child
rights monitoring
system better
serves knowledge
and evidence
generation,
specifically on
child
vulnerabilities, for
decision-making,
and reporting and
advocacy related
to the Convention
on the Rights of
the Child

% of 2011 Committee on the
Rights of the Child (CRC)
concluding observations
implemented
Baseline: 50% (2014)
Target: at least 70% (2017)

Juvenile justice-friendly
procedures in place

Reports on the
Status of
Children in the
City

CRC Report
(2017)

Reports from
# of public engagements
relevant
(Parliament hearings, businesses bodies/media
that have adopted corporate social
responsibility [CSR] principles,
media coverage) on key child
rights issues
Baseline: 1 (2014) (Parliament
hearing);
0 (# of businesses that have
adopted CSR principles); TBD
media coverage (2015)
Target: 3 (2020);
30 (2020); and TBD

National and subnational
mechanisms established to
promote adolescents’ civic
participation

By 2020:
Universal data-portal on
child-related statistics in line
with international standards
in place

As in outcome 1 plus
Ministry of Foreign
Affairs

1 138

500

1 638

National capacity to reveal
and monitor bottlenecks in
realization of children’s
rights strengthened;
Child rights agenda is the
subject of public discourse;
Existing and new
partnerships, especially in
technologies and social
media, contribute to
progressive realization of
children’s rights

_______

15/15

