Belize
Country programme document
2013-2016

The draft country programme document for Belize
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.14) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.1

Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

17

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)

4a

(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

2/6, ../..

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2006)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

94 b
95/95 c
98 c
98

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

90

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

2.3

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female, 2001)

40

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

94
94/95, 92/97, 93/98
3 740

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

96

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
b
The reported estimate is 57 deaths per 100,000 live births (2008), as presented in the Belize
Basic Indicators, Volume 6, Ministry of Health, 2009. The estimate of 94 deaths per 100,000
live births was developed by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts),
adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. Additional information
is available at www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
c
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The long-term growth performance of Belize has been good compared to that
of its Central American counterparts. Belize has demonstrated strong growth (4 per
cent on average but with sharp fluctuations), starting in 1960 when it was the
second-poorest country in the region. By 2006, the country had risen to the ‘top
tier’, with a gross domestic product per capita near that of Costa Rica and Panama.
Belize weathered the recent financial crisis fairly well when compared to Caribbean
Community countries. However, the Government will be faced with important
economic challenges designed to break the fluctuations in growth rates. The
Government of Belize remains committed to maintain its investment in its human
capital.
2.
The 2010 census estimates provisionally a population of 312,000: 158,000
males and 155,000 females. The total number of households is about 79,272, with
an average household size of 3.9. Among this population some 50 per cent are
Mestizo, 21 per cent Creole, 10 per cent Mayan, 4.6 per cent Garinagu and 14.4 per
cent includes East Indians, Mennonite, Lebanese, and Taiwanese. In addition to a

2

downward trend household size, another demographic trend is the continued
immigration of persons who tend to arrive as single adults or smaller family units.
In 2008, almost half the population growth rate came from immigration, compared
to one quarter in 2006. Much of that immigration has occurred in Belize and Cayo
districts and is visible in Stann Creek district. In 2009, 60 per cent of these
immigrants came from Guatemala and El Salvador, and 19 per cent came from
Mexico. There is a notable trend of an increase in the propor tion of female-headed
households, from 27 per cent in 2002 to 30 per cent in 2009.
3.
According to the 2010 Census, although both the urban and rural populations
grew between 2000 and 2010 by 23.7 per cent and 36.7 per cent, respectively, more
people live in rural areas (171,000 persons) than urban ones (138,000). This
situation may result from immigration.
4.
The Belize economy and social conditions are influenced by its geo -political
context. Belize borders Mexico and Guatemala, and is a member of the Cen tral
American Integration System. It also shares the British colonial connection with the
English-speaking Caribbean through its history and membership both in the
Caribbean Community and the Commonwealth. Like its neighbours, Belize faces
vulnerabilities such as natural disasters and climate change. Along with
demographic changes including immigration, the Government will be confronted
with important social demands for adequate physical and social infrastructure,
health, education, media, and information and communication technology services
to meet the needs of a population with changing cultural and globalized influences
and expanding life expectancy.
5.
One major obstacle to social well-being is poverty. The monetary poverty rate
increased from 33 per cent in 1995 to 41.3 per cent in 2009 — indicating that Belize
is not on track to achieve the target of 16.8 per cent by 2015 (Millennium
Development Goal 1). The northern districts of Corozal and Orange Walk have now
joined the southern districts of Toledo and Stann Creek receiving more attention
from the Government to poverty reduction. The change is linked to the vulnerability
of export agriculture to external price shocks, combined more recently with the
negative effects on demand from the global economic crisis and natural disasters.
6.
To exacerbate the challenge, the indigence rate increased from 10.8 per cent in
2002 to 15.8 per cent in 2009; Belize is not on track to achieve the target of 6.7 per
cent by 2015. With a Gini coefficient showing inequalit y at 0.42 in 2009, Belize is
experiencing pronounced inequity in health, education and social protection. This
complex situation require efforts that focus on addressing, in an integrated manner,
the following four types of inequalities affecting children. These will be addressed
as a continuum across the lifecycle of the child:
(a) Economic inequalities that give increasing power and influence to those
with higher incomes and leave excluded groups with fewer assets and opportunities;
(b) Spatial inequalities that reflect the structures and patterns of economic
growth and leave excluded groups living in areas that make them harder to reach;
(c) Cultural inequalities, including gender and other forms of
discrimination and devaluation that treat excluded groups as inferior to others,
thereby perpetuating social exclusion;

3

(d) Political inequalities that reflect the concentration of economic power
and influence among a limited group and the lack of voice and adequate
participation of the excluded groups and their communities in the decisions that
affect their lives.
7.
In education (Millennium Development Goal 2), challenges remain in both
coverage and quality in all levels of the system. Challenges include inadequate early
stimulation, malnutrition and low levels of parenting skills in early childhood
development. Although the number of preschool facilities has increased in some
districts, major gaps still exist. Despite the survival rate to the last primary grade
having increased from 87.2 per cent in 2002 to 91.9 per cent in 2009, the primary
school net enrolment rate fell from 90.3 per cent in 1992 to 83.7 per cent in 2009.
The repetition rate remains very high, particularly in the first grade (14 per cent),
contributing to early dropout and low self-esteem. Some 43 per cent of children
13-16 years olds attending school in Stann Creek, and 38 per cent of those in
Toledo, are still in primary instead of secondary schools, where they should be,
according to their age.
8.
Several bottlenecks hamper the attendance and provision of quality education
for all, such as direct and indirect costs for families. While the legal framework
indicates that public education is free, insufficient attention is being paid to socio cultural diversity and to the needs of children with disabilities and adolescent girls
who are pregnant. Poor planning and limited monitoring capacity of the education
system are also preventing the reaching of the goal of all children attending school .
The ratio of girls to boys in primary school (Millennium Development Goal 3)
increased from 0.94 in 1995 to 1.01 in 2009, and more girls than boys are
participating in secondary and tertiary education.
9.
A 2009 assessment of water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH) in
schools indicates that conditions are still poor. Some 22.1 per cent of school water
resources are unreliable. Up to 70 per cent (384) of schools nationally do not meet
international standards for quantity of toilet facilities.
10. With respect to child health (Millennium Development Goal 4), Belize
maintains high immunization coverage, with a rate of 96.6 in 2009. Progress was
made in reducing the child mortality rate, from 44 to 17 deaths per 1,000 live births
between 1990 and 2010. The proposed target is 8 deaths per 1,000 live births by
2015. The infant mortality rate dropped significantly, from 35.3 to 14.2 deaths per
1,000 live births between 1990 and 2010. Maternal health also showed signs of
improvement between 1993 and 2010. The maternal mor tality ratio decreased from a
high of 154.8 deaths per 100,000 live births in 1993 to 55.3 deaths per 100,000 live
births in 2010. Another health issue is HIV/AIDS. Belize has the highest HIV
prevalence rate (2.1 per cent) of any Central American country.
11. There are a number of challenges faced by Belize relating to child protection.
Drug trafficking, crime and violence are common threats to development. The
Central American sub-region has been labelled one of the most violent in the world.
This phenomenon is a result of multiple factors. Among them is the increasing
circulation of small arms and ammunition in the Central America and the Caribbean,
drug trafficking that is insidious, and violence propelled by spatial, social, and
economic inequalities.

4

12. The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women are important guiding
frameworks for rights-based development. Since ratifying the conventions, the
Government of Belize has made several important legislative and policy
developments/reforms to align national laws to international standards. The
Education Act 2010 and the Social Services Agencies Regulations prohibit corporal
punishment in schools and residential care facilities for children. A new social
protection programme, BOOST, is being implemented to guarantee the rights of
children to social protection, health and education. The standards and principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child have been expressly enact ed into law
through the Families and Children’s Act 2000, and a National Plan of Action (NPA)
has been developed, including the establishment of a National Committee for
Families and Children.
13. Despite these important gains, some gaps remain in protection, including the
need for a fuller incorporation of the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child into all domestic legislation. Alignment with international standards is
required in the Criminal Code and the Summary Jurisdiction Act. Furthe r attention
is also required in several areas: to clarify the legal definition of the child, to
consider the child’s evolving capacity, to address the rights of migrant children, and
to remove from the law discriminatory practices related to girls. Plans h ave been
made to promote conditions conducive to the social well-being of children with
disabilities as follow-up to the country’s recent ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. UNICEF conducted a specific analysis on
children with disabilities in 2011, paving the way for policy and programme
development under the committed leadership of the Special Envoy for Women and
Children.
14. While the Constitution of Belize guarantees to all persons freedom from
discrimination, patterns of discrimination still exist with respect to gender and
ethnicity. These patterns affect children’s attitudes about exclusion from society and
lack of opportunity. Structural and cultural barriers tend to reduce the level of
women’s participation in high-level political leadership. Women in Garifuna and
Creole villages generally play a greater role in community life than women in
Mayan communities. With respect to cultural participation, the Garifuna Council
operates a programme to train children and adolescents in the history, language and
aspirations of the Garifuna people. A similar revival of Mayan culture has taken
place with the hard work of the Maya Leaders Alliance of Toledo.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2012
Key results achieved
15. UNICEF has partnered with the Government of Belize to build a sound
evidence base, which is used to monitor child poverty and influence national policy
formation in favour of the most disadvantaged. This has facilitated increased
availability of data on children and women at national and sub-national levels. The
availability has been increased through support to the implementation of Multiple
Indicator Cluster Surveys(MICS) and dissemination of the resulting data for use and
decision making, and through GenderInfo, NPAInfo, BelizeInfo. Data has helped to

5

track progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals in nutrition
and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), as well as those related to children with
disabilities and of adolescent girls. The Government has adopted concrete national
standards for WASH in schools, maternal and child health, and inclusive, quality
education, including the introduction of Intercultural Bilingual Education.
16. Exclusive breastfeeding rates (0-6 months) increased from 10 per cent to
18 per cent between 2006 and 2011, largely as a result of the baby-friendly
certification of hospitals and clinics. In these safe and friendly environments,
appropriate young child feeding practices are promoted. Additionally, mother -tochild transmission of HIV was reduced from 19 per cent in 2007 to 3.2 per cent in
2010, largely because of improvements in clinical protocols and practices, with
strong emphasis on capacity-building, monitoring and evaluation.
17. In response to the 2005 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and the United Nations Secretary-General’s study on violence
against children, corporal punishment in schools and institutions was abolished by
law in 2011.
18. In partnership with the Government of Belize, UNICEF has assisted in
increasing birth registration rates by 10 per cent in Southern Belize, and steps are
being taken to address the systemic bottlenecks that impede access to birth
registration among the most excluded populations.
Lessons learned
19. Serious disparities are masked by national averages. Experience has shown
that ongoing improvement of information systems, strengthened data collection and
disaggregation exposes, and helps to reduce, these disparities. Using disaggregated
evidence and building institutional capacity and networks through local universities
promote transformative public governance practices that are integrated and
collaborative, thus delivering better results for rights -holders. These institutions
include the University of the West Indies Open Campus and the University of
Belize. The 2010 midterm review of the country programme provided the
opportunity to build a strong life-cycle approach to the overall country programme
by limiting the number of core programme areas to three, more closely integrating
programmes and inserting a subnational focus directly designed to reach the most
disadvantaged children in Toledo and South Side Belize City. This design improved
efficiency in resource allocation and use and programme outcomes and is serving as
the basis for the new country programme for 2013 -2016.
20. Combining an equity-focused policy approach with concrete support to
institutional capacity-building at the sub-national level improves results for the most
disadvantaged boys and girls. This has been demonstrated, among others, in the
efforts related to increasing birth registration in Southern Belize.

6

The country programme, 2013-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Quality social services with equity

1 000

2 000

3 000

Monitoring child rights

1 500

1 250

2 750

500

250

750

3 000

3 500

6 500

Cross-sectoral
Total

Preparation process
21. The CPD was developed through a participatory process. Two Common
Country Assessment (CCA) workshops provided the forums for partners to review
the UNICEF-mandated areas and inequities related to children. Two United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) prioritization workshops were held
to ensure that the UNDAF, CCA and CPD meet national priorities and mobilize
national ownership. The launch of the UNICEF Situation Analysis and the Annual
Review helped to sharpen the focus on sub-national needs and responses related to
boys and girls. Discussions with boys and girls nationwide who were actively
engaged in youth policy development provided important input to guide
prioritization.
Programme components, results and strategies
22. The overall goal of the 2013-2016 country programme is to contribute to the
realization of the rights of boys and girls by focusing on reduction of disparities and
inequalities. This will be done by supporting efforts towards the attainment of an
equitable standard of living for the people of Belize, in line with the international
human and child rights and as stated in its national development plan, Horizon
2030. The country programme will have a special focus on building the national and
sub-national institutional capacity to address the bottlenecks and barriers that
systematically impede the realization of the rights of the most at risk, excluded and
disadvantaged children. It will contribute to the improvement of the situation of all
children and adolescents, with special attention given to Southern Belize (Toledo
and Stann Creek districts) and South-side Belize City.
23. The programme of cooperation will support the achievement of the following
key results by 2016: (a) boys and girls from excluded and disadvantaged targeted
communities benefit from the implementation of effective and inclusive national and
sub-national policies and integrated programmes on child protection, early
childhood development (ECD), and education; and (b) boys and girls benefit from
the application of stronger domestic legislative framework meeting international
standards, and a child rights monitoring system that includes social budgets and
social expenditure assessment at national and sub -national levels. These results will
support the country’s response to the observations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child and Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Recommendations included promotion of gender equality as an integral part of

7

national development, institutional capacity-strengthening, birth registration, childfriendly budgeting, establishment of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and
enforcement of protection legislation. The programme ’s main strategy will focus on
institutional capacity-building, particularly related to ECD, education and nutrition
services. Moreover, the programme will support policy assessment and
implementation of regulatory frameworks, with an equity and gender focus.
Targeted advocacy strategies will capitalize on evidence -based knowledge generated
through studies and evaluations and regular monitoring and assessment of the
situation of children. Policies will be promoted that promote equity, including in the
four key areas outlined in paragraph 6. This country programme will contribute to
and benefit from multi-country initiatives for the Caribbean in the areas of
education, child protection and data collection and management.
Programme components
Quality social services with equity
24. This component takes a lifecycle, gender-perspective and human rights-based
approach focusing on the development of capacities of government, institutional and
other partners and quality services favouring the most excluded boys and girls, 0 -18,
with special focus on most disadvantaged communities. This component aims at
ensuring that the most excluded boys and girls are reached by policies and
integrated programmes with a gender perspective in child protection, ECD and
education. Within this component, UNICEF will support the Ministries of
Education, Health, Human Development and Social Transformation, the
TumulK’incentre of learning (a Maya non-governmental organization)and the
Congress of Maya Teachers in identifying and addressing inequities, building
capabilities, and knowledge for the full implementation of the ECD and education
policies and services.
25. Institutional capacity will be built with District Education offices to strengthen
educational institutions, preschool to secondary, with improved school -readiness
practices and increased access to quality learning through establishing a network of
child-friendly schools that meet standards. Capacity-building will be supported for
an increased coverage (with a focus on Toledo, Stann Creek and Belize City) of an
integrated package of improved care and nutrition practices. Institutions at national
level will be strengthened to design, manage, and evaluate policies and programmes
geared towards quality education and building protective assets (competencies that
promote the well-being of children and facilitate their protection and the reduction
of risk). UNICEF will monitor the implementation of the policy to increase access
to and retention in quality secondary education including student support services,
teacher training and curriculum revision. The language aspect of the national
education policy and curriculum will be institutionalized in the schools in the
Southern districts.
26. This programme component is also built on the recognition that a strong
human-rights based child protection system will facilitate development across the
lifecycle. Systemic bottlenecks will be addressed, and institutional strengthening
and quality services for building just and secure systems of protection will be
supported, with a focus on urban settings where weak juvenile justice systems
prevail and violence is high. Violence prevention efforts will target young
adolescents (10-14), in and out of school with positive alternatives to violence

8

through community based programmes that include life and livelihood skills,
opportunities for entrepreneurship, sport for development, music for peace and after
school support. With respect to monitoring of child rights and protection, the
programme will advocate, build capacity and influence social norms for a fully implemented, prevention-oriented approach with accompanying policies so that
young offenders can receive early attention and rehabilitation.
27. In urban and rural settings, institutional capacity will be built (for example,
through better use of knowledge evidence and data by policy makers and building
capacities of claims-holders) to identify and implement changes in policies,
programmes and practices to (a) address child labour and the right to education and
recreation for migrants and children with disabilities; and (b) to promote social
cohesion in small, ethnically diverse communities.
28. Initiatives for child and adolescent development will be prioritized through
advocacy, empowerment and by strengthening the know-how and capabilities of
public institutions in ensuring provision of quality services in child protection, ECD
and education. The component will promote early cognitive stimulation, prov ide
guidance to improve readiness for early childhood education and support parent
education. Child-friendly cities and spaces initiatives that address cultural rights and
reintegrating communities through the use of information and communication
technology, sports, arts and culture will be promoted.
29. To ensure sustainable results, efforts will be made for the establishment and
strengthening of sub-national partnerships through local government. For many of
these approaches, close coordination will be maintained with United Nations entities
as well as civil society partners for addressing health issues, including evidence based advocacy to reduce the impact of the AIDS epidemic. Where needed,
assistance from centres of excellence in Latin America and the Caribbean will be
requested for the provision of technical assistance and capacity -building. During
periods of emergency, the most vulnerable urban and rural settings will receive
support for a quality response in child protection, water, nutrition and edu cation.
Safety and preventive practices for periods of disaster preparedness, risk reduction
and response will be mainstreamed.
30. The implementation of communication for development strategies to foster
sustained changes in behaviour will accompany all programme areas particularly to
promote human rights with equity, including gender equality, and for the adoption of
preventive practices by rights-holders and duty-bearers.
Monitoring child rights
31. The monitoring of child rights is a core role of U NICEF. This programme
component will focus on quality assurance and monitoring for progress, bottlenecks,
obstacles and positive practices in line with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimi nation against
Women to inform action, advocacy and policy formulation and implementation. This
programme component supports capacity-building of country-led monitoring and
evaluation by independent monitoring mechanisms, national institutions, and
organizations in the social sector. For example, a network of monitoring and
evaluation officers and national planners will be established to ensure that policy is
grounded in evidence, to assess investments for children and guide policy. The
programme will include monitoring of the status of boys and girls and their rights. It

9

will focus on evidence-based policy in early childhood, education, adolescent and
youth development. The component will centre on fostering timely reporting by the
State to the human rights bodies (Committee on the Rights of the Child and the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women) and following up
on their recommendations. It will also promote regular collection, dissemination and
analysis of disaggregated data, including quality statistics (for example, through the
MICS and DevInfo). This will support evidence-informed policy formulation; the
monitoring and implementation of social budgeting; and the review of national
development plans and legislation for impact on children.
32. UNICEF will work towards strengthening the country-led capacity for
monitoring and evaluation, in collaboration in particular with Caribbean partners.
This process will cover four core areas of emphasis: (a) ensuring the existence of
disaggregated quality and internationally harmonized statistics for children,
adolescents and women; (b) ensuring capacity for analysis and evaluation of
national policies and programmes related to children, adolescents and women,
including the analysis of social budgets; (c) ensuring that there is systematic
monitoring of and reporting on the situation of children, adolescents and women,
using all types of sources; and (d) ensuring that the work of Belize in monitoring
and evaluation is linked sub-regionally to the Caribbean Community and a
Caribbean Knowledge Centre on Children to be established in 2012 -2013. The
component will also support the development of the University of Belize Policy
Observatory, to facilitate research, analysis of data with a gender perspect ive and
monitoring of child rights and social budgets.
Cross-sectoral
33. The cross-sectoral area will cover recurrent costs for activities not directly
attributable to one programme, such as travel, equipment, and salaries of staff
performing cross-cutting functions, including communication for development and
advocacy.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
34. The UNDAF has been shaped by Horizon 2030, the long-term national
development plan. The CPD was developed under the leadership of the three partner
Ministries of Human and Social Development and Transformation, the Ministry of
Health and the Ministry of Education to ensure that national priorities served as a
framework. It is grounded in the UNDAF priorities, namely: (a) Advancing human
rights with equity; (b) Promoting economic and social well -being, citizen security
and justice; (c) Environmental and Natural Resource Management, Disaster Risk
Reduction and Climate Change mainstreamed into public policies and development
processes; and (d) Democratic Governance, Capacity Development, Effectiveness
and Responsiveness enhanced. All UNDAF priorities will support improvements in
the ‘ecology’ for boys and girls (conditions conducive to their well-being in all
settings), reducing risks that prevent fulfilment of children ’s rights. Strengthening
cross-sectoral linkages across districts in any of these priority are as will have a
major influence on human well-being and equity in Belize.
Relationship to international priorities

10

35. The Millennium Development Goals provide a higher-level international
framework for the CPD. The recent Millennium Development Goal scorecard for
Belize highlighted a number of gaps in basic services (water and sanitation,
nutrition, education) and high levels of poverty that require urgent attention. As
poverty represents the underlying cause and obstacle to the achievement of rights
and well-being, the CPD 2013-2016 will support the national effort to overcome
challenges. The UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP), 2006-2013, and the
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action continue to provide
relevant frameworks to guide national efforts around the core areas of ECD,
education, protection and disaster preparedness, risk reduction and response to
emergencies. These frameworks together advance a number of indicators and targets
in support of achieving gender equality and hu man rights across programme areas,
guide progress and align national efforts with those in neighbouring Central
America and the Caribbean. Such alignment creates the opportunity for south -south
collaboration and partnership-building for children. Outstanding recommendations
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women will be addressed using a number of strategies to
build capacity and remove bottlenecks for rights-based social policy development,
and to strengthen the legal framework for child protection. The 2010 UNICEF study,
“Narrowing the Gaps to Meet the Goals”, provides sound evidence for advocacy
regarding the need to adopt an equity-focused approach to address lagging progress
on Millennium Development Goals. The effects of climate change deserve high priority attention. UNICEF will complement the lead role played by the United
Nations Development Programme, for example by empowering young people to act
as agents of change.
Major partnerships
36. UNICEF will continue to play a pivotal role in building a network of
trustworthy and technically strategic partnerships for children and women ’s
development in Belize. The University of the West Indies Open Campus will
collaborate with UNICEF to provide capacity-building to partners to help advance
operational aspects of programme management, public finance management and to
provide guidance on human rights programming at the institutional level.
Partnership arrangements will be strengthened with the University of Belize to
monitor child rights through a Public Policy Observatory (with links to a Caribbean
Knowledge Centre for Children). The Observatory will serve as an important
resource to the Government of Belize in shaping social polic ies that would ensure
that children, women and poor families are not marginalized in public sector
allocations. In line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, UNICEF will
work closely with non-governmental organizations and the Government of Beliz e to
identify core areas for budgetary allocation, implementation and policy priorities.
The programme will continue to strengthen the collaborative relationship with other
members of the United Nations country team and other international donor partners.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
37. A four-year Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will outline support to national
and regional monitoring systems, studies and evaluation activities. The
Representative, with the support of the Programme Sp ecialist, will be responsible
for the overall coordination of the country programme. Progress will be monitored

11

through joint annual programme reviews with the counterparts and partners based
on the implementation of multi-year work plans. The midterm review of the
programme will be carried out in 2014 in parallel to the UNDAF midterm review
and will take into consideration the new UNICEF MTSP, 2014 -2017. The data from
the MICS completed in 2011 will serve as baseline data, disaggregated by sex,
district and urban/rural areas. Some key indicators to be monitored will include the
under-five mortality rate, the proportion of underweight children, the maternal
mortality ratio, access to improved water and sanitation, infant immunization
(DPT3), rate of birth registration, mean years of schooling, boys and girls reaching
grade 5 of primary school, the male and female literacy rate and HIV prevalence.
UNICEF Belize will conduct another MICS in 2015, which will be used to monitor
progress by the end of 2016. Over the period 2013 to 2015, UNICEF staff and
counterparts will make field visits in order to qualitatively monitor programme
progress and to advocate for social change as part of the overall monitoring and
evaluation plan. To monitor resources invested in the country programme, where
necessary UNICEF will conduct small surveys to identify gaps and assess progress.

12

