Bhutan
Common country programme document
2014-2018

The draft common country programme document for Bhutan
(DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2013/BTN/1 and Add.3), was presented
to the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2013
annual session (18-21 June 2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version, which includes the UNICEF results and resources
framework, was approved at the 2013 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 September 2013.

Contents
Page
I.

Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 3

II.

Situation analysis ............................................................................................................. 3

III.

Past cooperation and lessons learned ................................................................................ 7

IV.

Proposed programme........................................................................................................ 8

V.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation ...................................................... 13

Annex
I.

2

UNICEF results and resources framework for Bhutan, 2014-2018 ................................... 16

I. Introduction
1.
UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF have developed a draft common country
programme document for 2014-2018, building on the One United Nations
Programme (hereinafter referred to as the One Programme), which encompasses
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and the
UNDAF Action Plan. The draft common country programme document reflects
the strategic priorities and key results of the One Programme, with
complementary, organization-specific results and resources frameworks. It seeks
to promote United Nations coherence and enhance joint programming to support
national development objectives.
2.
In 2008, Bhutan adopted the ‘delivering as one’ approach. That approach
seeks to increase the effectiveness and impact of the United Nations by
increasing the coherence of programmes and reducing the transaction costs for
implementing partners. The draft common country programme for Bhutan
follows this approach to: (a) highlight cross-cutting issues; (b) strengthen
synergies; (c) reinforce complementarities; and (d) remove duplication, in order
to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in achieving focused results. The draft
programme also reduces the review burden for the Government and enables
participating organizations to harmonize their efforts and articulate areas of
cooperation.

II. Situation analysis
3.
Bhutan is a small, landlocked country in the eastern Himalayas, bordered
to the south, east and west by India and to the north by China. It is one of the
youngest democracies in the world, with a population of just over 720,000.1 The
concept of ‘gross national happiness’ in Bhutan promotes a balanced approach
to development that encompasses good governance, environmental
conservation, cultural preservation and community vitality, in addition to
traditional socioeconomic indicators. Building on United Nations General
Assembly resolution 65/309 on happiness, Bhutan has contributed to the global
dialogue on holistic and sustainable development, including the United Nations
post-2015 development agenda.
4.
The economy of Bhutan, with a real gross domestic product growth rate of
8.51 per cent (down from 11.68 per cent in 2010)2 has experienced robust
growth. The development of the country is largely dependent on the
sustainability of its natural resources, with hydropower, tourism and agriculture
serving as the main sources of revenue. The Eleventh Five-Year Plan, 2014__________________
1
2

The National Statistics Bureau indicates a total population of 720,679 (2012).
National Statistics Bureau, 2012.

3

2018, reflects the importance of these issues, focusing on self-reliance and
inclusive, ‘green’ socioeconomic development.
5.
With a per capita income of $2,070 in 2011, Bhutan ranks in the lower
middle-income bracket of the World Bank classification of national economies.
However, Bhutan remains on the list of least developed countries. In its 2009
review, the United Nations Committee for Development Policy rated the
economic vulnerability of Bhutan at 52.9 per cent, based on factors such as
exposure to natural shocks and disasters and to structural constraints inherent in
the country. The economic vulnerability index places Bhutan in the mid-range
of least developed countries, suggesting a high degree of vulnerability.3
6.
Pockets of poverty exist. The poverty rate is 12 per cent nationwide and
16.6 per cent in rural areas. Approximately 98 per cent of the poor participate in
a subsistence economy that is dominated by rain-fed agriculture, the raising of
livestock, and forestry. In many rural communities, residents live close to the
poverty line and are vulnerable to environmental shocks, including natural
disasters.
7.
The increased frequency of natural disasters and the country’s
vulnerability to climate change add urgency to efforts to address the threat of
natural hazards. This trend is likely to place pressure on socioeconomic assets,
particularly in rural areas.
8.
The production of hydropower is capital intensive. Its low labour
requirements and job profiles are ill-suited to the skills of the local labour
market and have hampered the creation of local jobs. While overall
unemployment is low at 2.1 per cent,4 youth unemployment is significantly
higher (7.3 per cent). Underemployment is a major development challenge. The
underemployed as a percentage of the total working population increased from
5.5 per cent in 2006 to 14.6 per cent in 2012. While the gender gap in
unemployment has narrowed in recent years, jobs held by women tend to have
less favourable conditions than those held by men.
9.
The 2007 Gini index for Bhutan, at 0.38, was among the highest in South
Asia, with consumption of the richest quintile four times that of the poorest 20
per cent of the population. One of the foremost challenges is to reduce
disparities between rural and urban areas and among regions, districts and
blocks (geographical administrative units consisting of groups of villages), in
order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Based on the
__________________
3
4

4

Bhutan Round Table Meeting Background Paper, 2011.
National Labour Force Survey, 2012.

multidimensional poverty indicator analysis, rural areas are poorer than urban
areas, and the Eastern region is poorer than the Western and Central regions.
10. The Government has identified urbanization as an important emerging
challenge, since more than 31 per cent of the total population lives in urban
areas. By 2020, this percentage is expected to increase to between 50 and 73 per
cent. The rapid rate of urbanization is expected to lead to: (a) worsening
congestion; (b) stress on sanitation and waste-management services;
(c) environmental degradation; (d) urban poverty; (e) unemployment; and
(f) underemployment.
11. Bhutan has improved social outcomes, especially in health and education,
with children and women as the main beneficiaries. It has achieved a number of
Millennium Development Goal targets, including those related to underweight
children and the ratio of girls to boys in basic education. However, Bhutan still
lags behind other countries in South Asia on some indicators, such as the
Millennium Development Goal targets for reducing the under-five mortality rate
by two thirds and reducing the maternal mortality ratio to below 140 maternal
deaths per 100,000 live births by 2015.
12. Chronic malnutrition exists among young mothers and among children
under five. An estimated one third of children under the age of five suffer from
some form of stunting. Addressing these challenges will require a
comprehensive approach focusing on issues related to: (a) a healthy
environment; (b) safe water and sanitation; (c) proper childcare; (d) exclusive
breastfeeding; (e) education; and (f) the health of mothers.
13. Although past initiatives have improved the quality of education in
Bhutan, additional investments are required to further improve its quality and to
ensure equitable access to education for all children, especially rural and out-ofschool children.
14. The low contraceptive prevalence rate (48 per cent) has increased the
population’s vulnerability to reproductive health problems. The prevalence rate
of sexually transmitted infections is high and is increasing. Although overall
HIV prevalence is low, it is high among females. More than 50 per cent of those
infected with HIV are economically productive. Given the high adolescent
fertility rate (59 births per 1,000 women aged 15-19), there is a need to focus
attention on adolescent sexual and reproductive health, including issues related
to behaviour, safety, social relationships, self-esteem, education and skills
development.
15. Rapid changes in society have increased the vulnerability of some
population groups and increased the need for more formal systems of support.
5

Vulnerable groups are defined as: (a) youth; (b) vulnerable children; (c) single
parents; (d) victims of gender-based violence; (e) differently abled people; and
(f) senior citizens. The Eleventh Plan recognizes the importance of addressing
the needs of these groups. The national youth policy, 2011, and the national plan
of action on child protection, 2012, outline the holistic approaches required in
these areas.
16. Nearly one in four ever-married women aged 15-49 reported experiencing
some form of domestic violence involving their husbands. Many of these
women are from poor households and have no formal education. At the same
time, 68 per cent of women reported having an ‘accepting’ attitude towards
domestic violence. Parliament enacted a domestic violence prevention bill in
March 2013.
17. Women and girls lag behind in: (a) participation in politics and in the
labour force; (b) literacy rates; and (c) participation in tertiary education. In
2012, the literacy rate was 65 per cent for males and 38.7 per cent for females.
Even among youth, male literacy is higher (87 per cent) than female literacy (80
per cent).
18. Since the transition to a parliamentary democracy in 2008, the
Government has sought to strengthen democratic governance. However, there is
a need to promote the active participation of the population in governance, with
a focus on youth. Access to justice may be denied when those requiring
assistance do not have the capacity to demand it. This can result from: (a) low
awareness of available legal services; (b) limited physical access; and (c)
insufficient legal and paralegal services.
19. Since 2008, Bhutan has made progress in decentralization. Nevertheless,
the limited capacity of local governments has impeded effective service delivery
as well as efforts to increase resilience to natural hazards and economic shocks.
Capacity constraints affect planning, budgeting, public-finance management and
procurement. Such constraints also affect the mainstreaming of cross-cutting
issues such as gender equality, climate change and disaster management.
20. Non-governmental entities play an important role in expanding democracy
and in delivering services. Since 2010, the number of civil society organizations
that are formally registered in the country has increased from a few to 26. There
is a need to increase the capacity of civil society organizations and other nongovernmental entities, including academia, the private sector, learning
institutions and farmers’ associations, to support democracy and the delivery of
services. There is also a need to engage the media as a development-change
agent.

6

III. Past cooperation and lessons learned
21. To provide a common operational framework, the first common country
programme action plan, 2008-2013, focused on: (a) generating income and
employment in targeted poor areas; (b) increasing access to and utilization of
high-quality health services; (c) increasing access to high-quality education for
all, while ensuring gender equality; (d) strengthening institutions and people’s
participation; and (e) strengthening the national capacity for environmental
sustainability and disaster-risk reduction, while mainstreaming gender concerns.
Technical support provided to different national entities resulted in increased
awareness of gender-responsive governance and better coordination of resourcemobilization efforts and assistance in response to the earthquakes of 2009 and
2011.
22. The UNDAF midterm review noted that through the ‘delivering as one’
approach, United Nations interventions had become more relevant, more
responsive to local needs and more sustainable, with greater transparency and
accountability. An evaluation of the gender outcome highlighted the need to
focus on gender mainstreaming and to institutionalize gender-responsive
budgeting. The proposed programme therefore raises gender equality to the
outcome level, while mainstreaming the economic empowerment and political
participation of women. An evaluation of the environmental outcome underlined
the potential to strengthen linkages between environmental management and
poverty alleviation, which has been reflected in the proposed outcome on
sustainable development.
23. An evaluation of capacity development indicated that there were
opportunities to mainstream capacity development in all programmes, using a
structured approach that focuses on individual, organizational and institutional
levels. An evaluation of the poverty outcome stressed the need for job creation
for youth. The proposed sustainable development outcome therefore includes
expanded income-generation opportunities for youth. The focus on
strengthening local financial management reflected in outcome four is based on
the recommendations of an evaluation of decentralization efforts.
24. Joint monitoring efforts helped national and United Nations partners
assess needs and target activities more holistically. Midyear and year-end
progress reviews by the theme groups, under their respective UNDAF outcomes,
led to adjustments in the programme. Annual workplans, agreed by government
counterparts and United Nations counterparts in each theme group, fostered
coherence and alignment with national priorities. The workplans also
streamlined planning and budgeting procedures. While the midterm review
clearly highlighted the benefits of ‘delivering as one’, it also found that:
(a) some programme activities were fragmented; (b) synergies were not always
7

optimized; and (c) additional joint field monitoring efforts would have been
beneficial.

IV. Proposed programme
25. The goal of the draft common country programme is to support Bhutan in
achieving the national key result areas under the Eleventh Plan. Working in
collaboration with development partners, the three organizations will support:
(a) upstream policy advice; (b) capacity strengthening at individual,
organizational and institutional levels; and (c) the promotion of service demand
and utilization within civil society and the private sector.
26. The draft programme will also: (a) promote a sustainable, ‘green’
economy while addressing poverty in rural and urban areas, and will advance
adaptation to climate change and increased resilience to disasters; (b) provide
more equitable access to high-quality basic services and social protection; (c)
protect and promote the rights of women and children; and (d) consolidate
participatory democratic governance.
27. The programme will use analyses of population dynamics to guide
increased investments in gender equality, youth development, reproductive
health, the prevention of HIV/AIDS, and maternal and child health. These
investments will seek to improve the quality of life of the population, promote
sustainable development and reduce poverty. The programme will also support a
multisectoral approach to increasing the access of young people to youthfriendly services and life skills-based education.
28. The draft common country programme will focus on those areas in which
the three organizations have comparative advantages. These areas are reflected
in the output-level results under each of the four outcomes, which were selected
from the new One Programme. In areas where there is convergence, synergy and
complementarity among the three organizations, such as disaster-risk reduction,
gender equality and the empowerment of women, youth, and vulnerable people,
the programme will jointly achieve results.
29. The draft common country programme will also support follow-up by the
Government to universal periodic reviews, international conventions and other
instruments that the Government has ratified. These include: (a) the Convention
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women; (b) the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two optional protocols;
(c) the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development; (d) the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011-2020; (e) the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20); and (f) the Hyogo Framework for Action.

8

30. The draft programme will draw upon the global and regional knowledge
networks of partner organizations to share best practices and foster South-South
cooperation. It will take advantage of opportunities to improve public-private
partnerships, and will advocate with policymakers to improve inclusiveness in
policy processes so that the voices of the most vulnerable are heard.
Outcome one - sustainable development: By 2018, sustainable and
‘green’ economic growth that is equitable, inclusive, resilient to climate
change and natural disasters, and promotes poverty reduction and
employment opportunities, particularly for vulnerable groups, is
enhanced.
31. Sustainable and ‘green’ economic growth. In order to promote
sustainability, inclusive growth and poverty reduction, the draft common
country programme will support policies, capacity-building and innovative
actions with regard to natural-resource management, climate-change adaptation
and mitigation, and access to renewable energy. The draft programme will seek
to strengthen linkages between environmental management and income
generation. In order to promote ‘green’ businesses and income-generating
opportunities, in particular for vulnerable people, including youth and women,
the programme will support efforts to link the demand for and supply of labour,
in partnership with the Government, civil society and the private sector.
32. To reduce geographical disparities, the draft programme will provide
targeted rural communities with access to the knowledge and skills that will
enable them to develop business plans, and will provide cooperatives and
farmers’ groups with access to microcredit and market opportunities. Building
on the recommendations of a 2012 diagnostic trade integration study, the draft
programme will strengthen the institutional capacity to develop value chains to
promote Bhutanese products, diversified trade and inclusive growth.
33. Disaster-risk reduction. The Government approved a disaster-management
bill in February 2013. The draft common country programme will seek to
strengthen national and local institutions as well as strengthen their coordination
capacity. Reducing urban risks will be a priority of the programme. This will
include issues such as mandatory building codes, by-laws for safe building
construction, and risk-sensitive land-use plans. Recognizing the likelihood of
increased frequency in hydro-meteorological hazards due to climate change, the
draft common country programme also emphasizes improving preparedness and
adaptation practices, including strengthening early-warning systems and
response mechanisms.
Outcome two - essential social services: By 2018, there is increased and
equitable access to, utilization of and quality of inclusive, essential social
9

services for all, with a focus on sustaining the Millennium Development
Goals and addressing emerging challenges.
34. Education. Technical and financial assistance to pilot and expand
innovative approaches will help to strengthen the enabling environment and
improve the quality of service delivery. The draft common country programme
will focus on the national education policy, in particular with regard to:
(a) quality and equity in education; (b) early childhood care and development;
and (c) special-needs education and non-formal education.
35. The draft common country programme will strengthen systems and
services to deliver high-quality education, focusing on evidence-based decisionmaking, including the education management information system. This will
facilitate efforts to track and monitor all children in the educational system. The
draft programme will incorporate data into the management information system
on general school education, early childhood care and development, specialneeds education and non-formal education.
36. The draft programme will enhance the capacity of education partners at
two levels. At the organizational level, support will improve the capacity to
determine and assess learning outcomes at different levels of school education
and contextualize education within the framework of child-friendly schools and
life-skills education, including sexuality education and ‘educating for gross
national happiness’. At the individual level, the draft common country
programme will enhance the capacity of district education officers, principals
and teachers.
37. Youth-friendly services. Cognizant of the needs of youth in Bhutan, the
three organizations will contribute to improved access to and utilization of
youth-friendly services, with a focus on reaching the most vulnerable youth,
thereby contributing to the implementation of the national youth policy and
action plan.
38. Health, nutrition and water and sanitation. The Eleventh Plan highlights
the need to strengthen health systems and promote efficiency in financing and
delivering health services. To this end, the draft common country programme
will strengthen the technical and analytical capacity of relevant government
institutions in order to continue the provision of free basic health services and to
adapt the health system to the ongoing demographic and epidemiological
transition. The draft common country programme will also explore opportunities
to foster convergence, synergy and complementarity among the approaches and
interventions of the three organizations.

10

39. The draft common country programme will strengthen the capacity of
non-governmental organizations and government institutions at national, district
and block levels in order to reduce under-five and maternal mortality, and
prevent HIV and malnutrition. The draft programme will foster convergence and
synergy to reduce teenage pregnancy and substance abuse among youth and
adolescents. The programme will include interventions in gender equality to
improve the capacity of health facilities and non-governmental organizations to
provide services to victims and survivors of gender-based violence. The
programme will also support the provision of safe water and sanitation facilities
in schools and monastic institutions, including nunneries, while strengthening
the capacity to utilize, maintain and sustain these services.
40. The draft common country programme will strengthen the institutional
capacity to identify and increase understanding of prevailing social norms,
knowledge and practices that hinder the demand for maternal and child health
services and optimal family practices.
41. Communication for development. The draft common country programme
will strengthen the capacity of implementing partners, including the media, to
develop and implement strategies, with a focus on increasing the utilization of
high-quality social services, including institutional deliveries, postnatal care and
optimal health services. Interventions will focus on understanding and
addressing the role of social norms and cultural practices. These interventions,
including innovative communication approaches and campaigns that build
knowledge and increase skills, will seek to promote behavioural change among
individuals that are most at risk, as well as among the general public.
Outcome three - gender equality and child protection: By 2018,
communities and institutions are strengthened at all levels to achieve
enhanced gender equality and the empowerment and protection of women
and children.
42. All organizations will support interventions to repeal or amend the
discriminatory provisions of existing laws. The organizations will also advocate
the formulation of new legislation and policies and the monitoring and
implementation of existing legislation and policies, to promote gender equality,
women’s empowerment and the protection of children.
43. Under the leadership of the National Commission for Women and
Children, the draft common country programme will promote gender
responsiveness in line ministries. The programme will achieve this by providing
technical support in gender mainstreaming, through targeted actions, and
through advocacy outreach efforts for civil society and the private sector. The
programme will also support the establishment of information management and

11

monitoring and evaluation systems in the Commission to facilitate the
formulation of evidence-based laws, policies and programmes that are relevant
to the advancement of women and their participation in development. The
United Nations will also assist the Government in implementing, and ensuring
compliance with, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Beijing Platform for Action and other
gender-related conventions and treaties.
44. United Nations organizations will work together to address gender-based
violence, focusing on increasing access to and the quality of services, including
protection, legal aid, and reintegration services. The organizations will also help
to strengthen coordination among government and non-governmental service
providers. To address the social norms, attitudes and practices that fuel genderbased violence, the draft programme will support interventions that engage men
and boys as ‘champions’ in eliminating such violence. The programme will also
provide technical support to non-governmental organizations, law enforcement
agencies and the health system to develop a comprehensive referral system.
45. To strengthen the protection of children from violence, abuse, exploitation
and neglect, the United Nations will demonstrate the cumulative impact of an
operational child-protection system at the district level. The programme will
provide concentrated support to at least four pilot districts, to enable all elements
of the system to operate synergistically. Interventions will include:
(a) prevention, early intervention and protective responses; (b) efforts to
strengthen supply and demand dimensions; and (c) efforts to ensure the genderresponsive service coverage of vulnerable children.
Outcome four - democratic governance and participation: By 2018,
governance institutions and communities exercise the principles of democratic
governance at national and local levels, with a focus on inclusiveness,
transparency, accountability and evidence-based decision-making.
46. The draft common country programme will strengthen the management
and use of statistics to promote effective and gender-responsive management of
public finances. To ensure gender equality at national and local levels, the draft
programme will introduce gender-responsive budgeting principles, which will
be a development priority. The programme will enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of local governments in meeting the needs of local populations by
introducing performance-based budgeting. It will also provide technical support
to enhance the capacity of government agencies to carry out the timely
monitoring of development programmes and projects, using the government
planning and monitoring system.

12

47. The United Nations will seek to improve the availability of data and the
use of statistics for evidence-based planning and decision-making at national
and subnational levels. The draft common country programme will support the
population and housing census, 2015, and the Bhutan multiple indicator survey,
2017. The programme will continue to support the institutionalization of
BhutanInfo (part of the DevInfo database system) and strengthen database
systems at the lowest levels of Government to collect, analyse and increase the
access of block-level planners to sex-disaggregated statistics. It will also
strengthen the national capacity to institutionalize training on population
research methods and policy analysis.
48. Participation, the media and access to justice. To further expand the
democratic culture, the draft programme will promote the informed and
inclusive participation of civil society in policy discussions by developing the
capacity of Bhutanese ‘think tanks’, academia and the media. The United
Nations will support the gender-responsive and equitable participation of
women and youth in decision-making processes at national and local levels. The
programme will invest in youth-led groups to strengthen horizontal networks
and connections among youth. Such efforts will promote peer-based solidarity,
including among marginalized youths, and more inclusive public debates.
49. The draft programme will also strengthen vertical linkages to ensure that
youth have their voices heard by decision makers in order to influence political
leadership, policies and programmes. In addition, the programme will support
voter and civic education in urban and rural areas, in partnership with the
Election Commission of Bhutan. To promote access to justice, in particular
among vulnerable people, the programme will support public outreach efforts
and informal justice mechanisms.
50. Local governance. Building on past progammes, the draft common
country programme will provide technical support to ensure the implementation
of the 2012 local government rules and regulations to improve coordination
between central government agencies and local governments. The draft
programme will also enhance the capacity of local governments, particularly in
the areas of planning, budgeting, public-finance management and procurement,
to support rights-based development planning and implementation. At the same
time, the draft programme will provide support to empower communities and
increase their resilience to external shocks and natural hazards.

V. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
51. The One Programme mainstreams the human rights-based approach by
organizing the support of the United Nations in three main categories:
13

(a) facilitating policy development to create an enabling environment for the
progressive fulfilment of human rights; (b) strengthening systems and services
to make them more responsive, particularly to the needs of the most vulnerable,
with a focus on developing the capacity of duty-bearers; and (c) promoting
behavioural change, the demand for and utilization of services, and the
empowerment of rights-holders at individual and community levels. The
programme will employ this framework, applied throughout all four outcomes,
to monitor programme implementation, remove bottlenecks and barriers, and
achieve planned results.
52. The three organizations are committed to monitoring the progress of the
draft common country programme as part of their commitment to development
effectiveness and accountability under the ‘delivering as one’ initiative. The
programme will build on existing national statistical and monitoring systems.
The One Programme monitoring and evaluation plan provides an overview of
indicators to track progress against the planned development results by the
Government, the United Nations and other contributing development partners.
The United Nations will also support efforts to strengthen national evaluation
capacity.
53. The Government and the United Nations will implement the draft common
country programme within the management and accountability structure of the
One Programme. The results and resources frameworks of the three
organizations are integral parts of the One Programme, to be signed by the
United Nations and the Government.
54. The Government, other national partners and United Nations partner
organizations will plan, implement and periodically review annual workplans
through joint theme groups that focus on the four outcomes. A joint
Government-United Nations country programme board, co-chaired by the
Secretary of the Gross National Happiness Commission and the United Nations
Resident Coordinator, will monitor the results of the annual workplans. Board
members will include senior officials of key national implementing partners and
United Nations country team members. Partner organizations will also
participate.
55. The draft common country programme will apply the harmonized cashtransfer principles for the transfer of resources, leading to a simplification of
procedures among the three organizations, as well as the World Food
Programme. The programme will be executed nationally through four possible
management arrangements: (a) direct cash transfer; (b) direct payment;
(c) reimbursement; and (d) management by organizations, to be identified
jointly. An assessment of the implementing partners, carried out jointly by the

14

Royal Audit Authority, the three organizations, and the World Food
Programme, will determine the choice of the management arrangements.
56. The United Nations, in conjunction with the Government, will
commission a detailed evaluation in the penultimate year of the One Programme
cycle. In order to maximize synergies between poverty reduction and
environmental sustainability, the United Nations and the Government will also
conduct a midterm review of outcome one. The evaluation of the programme
will assess: (a) the relevance of each One Programme outcome; (b) the
effectiveness and efficiency of the programme in achieving results; and (c) the
sustainability of the results and their contribution to the goals of the Eleventh
Plan.

15

16

Annex
UNICEF results and resources framework for Bhutan, 2014-2018
Programme approaches and strategies across three outcomes:
UNICEF directly supports outcomes 2, 3 and 4 of the four outcomes drawn from the One Programme, as detailed in the common nar rative
of the present document. Particular attention is paid to convergence, synergy and complementarity among the approaches and activities of
UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA, especially relating to common indicators. The main programme approaches and strategies are the follo wing:
1. Take a ‘Three dimensions’ approach for sector programmes: (a) policy: enabling environment; (b) systems: equitable and quality
services; and (c) demand promotion and increased utilization of social services, including addressing social norms.
2. Utilize communication for social and behavioural change.
3. Promote capacity development both for service uptake and evidence -building.
4. Undertake policy advocacy on priority issues, including child rights and child protection.
5. Promote children and youth as agents of change to eliminate gender-based violence, including through capacity-building; develop a
diversified partnership framework; and pilot models of child protection systems.
6. Collaborate with the Gross National Happiness Commission on results -based planning and management for strengthening local
government capacity.
National priorities: Poverty reduced and MDG-Plus achieved; food security and sustainability; the needs of vulnerable groups addressed;
integrated water utilization and management.
Related agency focus areas: Young child survival and development; basic education and gender equality; HIV/AIDS; policy advocacy and
partnerships for children’s rights.
I. Outcome Two
Indicators:
1. Adjusted basic net enrolment rate (F/M). Baseline: 95%; Target: 100%.
2. Adult (15+ years) literacy rate (F/M). Baseline: 59%; Target: 80%.
3. Completion rate (secondary). Baseline: (M) 84% (F) 85%; Target: 100%.
4. Under-5 mortality rate (disaggregated by sex, rural, urban). Baseline: National Health Survey, 2012 (to be set); Target: 40 per 1,000
live births.
5. Percentage of children under 5 stunted. Baseline: 33.5% (Bhutan Multiple Indicator Survey, BMIS); Target: below 30%.

6. Institutional delivery rate. Baseline: 63% (Annual Health Bulletin); Target: 80%.
7. Proportion of population (15-24 years) with comprehensive knowledge on HIV/AIDS. Baseline: 21%; Target: 60%.
8. Assessment of inequities in access to services and health outcomes. Baseline: Assessment in 2013; Target: Follow-up assessment in
2018.
9. Adolescent fertility rate. Baseline: 59/1,000 (BMIS); Target: 50/1,000.
Outputs, indicators
Output 2.1: Strengthened systems capacity for improved Education Management
Information System (EMIS) for evidence-based decision-making
Indicators
1. Evaluation/impact studies conducted on priority issues in education, including
assessment of learning outcomes for primary education. Baseline: N/A; Target: 5.
2. EMIS upgraded and fully institutionalized. Baseline: EMIS Version 2 available;
Target: EMIS version 3 operational.
Output 2.3: Stakeholders effectively plan, coordinate, implement and monitor
quality and inclusive education services
Indicators
1. Number of colleges offering Gross National Happiness (GNH) instruction and Life
Skills Education (LSE), and the number of teachers trained
Baseline: GNH 0, LSE 1; Target: GNH 5, LSE 2. Baseline: 1,200 teachers trained;
Target: all teachers and Resource Centre coordinators.
2. Number of teachers trained in multi-grade teaching.
Baseline: 476 (pre-service), 141 (in-service); Target: 900 (pre-service), 319
(in-service).
3. Number of Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) centres meeting
minimum standards.
Baseline: 78; Target: 300.
4. Number of schools providing a special education programme. Baseline: 8;
Target: 22.

Partners and partnership
frameworks
Ministries of Education;
Health, Home and Cultural
Affairs; Labour and Human
Resources; Royal Education
Council; Dratshang; Royal
University of Bhutan; district
administrations; Bhutan
Narcotic Control Agency;
Royal Bhutan Police; Drug
Regulatory Authority;
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs);
youth-led groups; and media

Resources
Regular resources:
$2,995,000;
Other resources:
$14,105,000

17

18

5. Number of non-formal-education learners completing functional English literacy;
including in (number of) monastic institutions.
Baseline: 0; Target: 30,000 learners. Target: 50 monastic institutions.
Output 2.4: Health facilities strengthened to provide quality maternal and child
health care (newborn health and nutrition included) and sexual and reproductive
health
Indicators
1. Number of health facilities with basic or comprehensive emergency obstetric and
neonatal care services (with UNFPA). Baseline: 7; Target: 15.
2. Number of hospitals and Basic Health Units (BHU) implementing Integrated
Management of Newborn and Childhood Illnesses (IMNCI), growth monitoring, and
early stimulation programmes.
Baseline for IMNCI and growth monitoring: 174 BHUs and 27 hospitals; Target: 184
BHUs and 30 hospitals. Baseline for ECCD: 0; Target: 30 hospitals and 100 BHUs.
3. Percentage of HIV-positive pregnant mothers receiving antiretroviral therapy.
Baseline: N/A; Target: 80%.
4. Percentage of health facilities with vaccines, cold chain equipment and
immunization supplies available. Baseline: 100%; Target: 100%.
Output 2.5: Education systems have improved disaster preparedness and response
plans
Indicators
1. Percentage of schools
Baseline: N/A; Target: 40%.

with

emergency

preparedness

plans

developed.

2. Percentage of schools with focal points trained in emergency preparednes s.
Baseline: N/A;
Target: 50%.

Output 2.6: Water, sanitation and hygiene in schools and monastic institutions
effectively implemented.
Indicators
1. Percentage of schools and monastic institutions with sanitation facilities
Baseline: schools 60%; monastic institutions/nunneries: N/A; Target: 85%.
2. Percentage of schools and monastic institutions with a functional water supply
Baseline: schools 70%; monastic institutions/nunneries: N/A; Target: 85%.
3. Percentage of schools promoting key health and hygiene behaviours
Baseline: schools 50%; monastic institutions/nunneries: N/A; Target: 90%.
Output 2.7: Youths (in-school and out-of-school) have increased access to youthfriendly services.
Indicator
1. Number of districts with the capacity to deliver youth-friendly services (with
UNFPA).
Baseline: 0; Target: 6.
Output 2.8: At-risk populations have enhanced knowledge and skills for improved
health, nutrition and well-being.
Indicators
1. Percentage of women attending first and third postnatal care visits (with UNFPA).
Baseline for first visit 70%; Target: 80%. Baseline for third visit: N/A; Target: 40%.
2. Percentage of rural households reached by public health messages/programmes.
Baseline: 0%; Target: 20%.
National priorities: The needs of vulnerable groups addressed; gender-friendly environment established for women’s participation; Safe society.
Related agency focus area(s): Basic education gender equality; child protection; policy advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights.

19

20

II. Outcome Three
Indicators
1. Percentage of women who report acceptance of domestic violence. Baseline: 68%; Target: 55%.
2. Percentage of concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on the
Rights of the Child incorporated into policies and programmes. Baseline: number of observations in 2012; Target: compliance increased
by 30%.
3. Percentage of boys, girls (aged 13-17) who report experiencing violence. Baseline: (to be confirmed in 2013); Target: (to be set in
2013).
4. Percentage of boys, girls (aged 13-18) who possess the life skills to be protected from and report all forms of abuses.
Baseline: (to be confirmed in 2013); Target: 20%.
Outputs, indicators

Partners and partnership
frameworks

Output 3.1: Policy environment for advancement of rights and protection of women and Ministries of Education;
Health; Home and Cultural
children strengthened.
Affairs; and Labour and
Indicators
Human Resources; National
1. Percentage of activities in the National Plan of Action for Child Protection implemented. Commission for Women and
Children; National Statistics
Baseline: 0%; Target: 40%.
Bureau; Royal Bhutan Police;
Royal Court of Justice; Office
2. Number of assessments conducted on priority child protection issues. Baseline: 0;
of the Attorney General;
Target: 4.
Dratshang; district
3. Timely quality reporting submitted by the Government to the Committee on the Rights administrations;
Parliamentarians; youth-led
of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
groups; media; and NGOs
Baseline: 3rd periodic report and initial report (on the Optional Protocols) submitted to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child; Target: 4th periodic report submitted (with UNDP).
Output 3.3: Boys, men, girls and women have increased awareness and display positive
attitudes on the prevention and elimination of gender-based violence.
Indicators
1. Number of networking groups on gender-based violence with trained counsellors in place
(with UNDP).
Baseline: 0; Target: 5.

Resources
Regular resources:
$1,020,000
Other resources:
$4,510,000

2. Percentage of men and boys engaged as champions to eliminate gender-based violence.
Baseline: 3%; Target: 15%.
3. Number of media reports/programmes on gender-based violence. Baseline: 0; Target:
30.
4. Number of institutions involved in case reporting on gender-based violence. Baseline: 0;
Target: 4.
Output 3.4. Institutions, communities, families and children in a minimum of four
districts have the knowledge, skills, resources, mechanisms to prevent, respond to
violence against children.
Indicators
1. Number of agencies, including child welfare committees/districts, guided by child
protection standard operating procedures and guidelines. Baseline: 0; Target: 5.
2. Percentage of children, families and communities reached by Communication for
Development strategies to adopt protective practices. Baseline: 0; Target: 20%.
National priorities: Poverty reduced and MDG-Plus achieved; needs of vulnerable groups addressed; gender-friendly environment created for
women’s participation.
Related agency focus area(s): basic education and gender equality; child protection from violence, exploitation and abuse; policy advocacy and
partnership for children’s rights.
III. Outcome Four
Indicator
1. Percentage of youths/women who report having opportunities to participate in local/national decision -making.
Baseline (youth): N/A; Target (youth): 20%.

21

22

Outputs, indicators

Partners and partnership
frameworks

Resources

Output 4.1: Key institutions strengthen systems for effective public finance
management and integrated monitoring of plans and programmes.

Ministries of Education and
Health; GNH Commission;
National Statistics Bureau;
district administrations;
National Commission for
Women and Children; NGOs;
Youth-led groups;
Parliamentarians; and media

Regular resources:
$555,000;

Indicators
1. Number of government institutions that incorporate gender-responsive planning and
budgeting.
Baseline: 0; Target: 70%.
2. Number of national institutes capable of delivering quality policy research/training.
Baseline: 0; Target: 1.
3. Number of offices at the subnational level with personnel trained in BhutanInfo data
management and use (with UNDP and UNFPA). Baseline: N/A; Target: 205.
4. Results of the Census 2015 and Bhutan Multiple Indicator Survey 2017 analysed and
disseminated to policymakers and planners (with UNFPA).
Baseline: Population and Housing Census of Bhutan 2005; Bhutan Multiple Indicator
Survey 2010; Target: Results of the Census 2015 and Bhutan Multiple Indicator Survey
2017 disseminated.
5. Number of NGOs with the capacity for child-sensitive and equitable programming in
social protection. Baseline: 0; Target: 3.
Output 4.3: Women and youth have increased opportunities to participate in political
leadership at national and local levels.
Indicators
1. Number of districts with a minimum of one operational youth-led group.
Baseline: 10; Target: 18.
2. Number of recommendations made through youth forums to influence national and
local development plans (with UNDP).
Baseline: 2; Target: 5.

Other resources:
$2,385,000

UNICEF indicative resources for 2014-2018
Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Outcome 2

2 995 000

14 105 000

17 100 000

Outcome 3

1 020 000

4 510 000

5 530 000

Outcome 4

555 000

2 385 000

2 940 000

4 570 000

21 000 000

25 570 000

Total

23

