Bolivia
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Bolivia
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.15) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

4.2

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

54

Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2008)

4a

(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2008)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2007)
Survival rate to last primary grade (% male/female, 2007)

3/6, 8/2
180 b
95/95 c
84 c

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

88

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%)

27

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

0.2

Child labour (%, 5-17 years of age, male/female, 2008)

26

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2001)

74

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

../.., 76/72, ../...
1 790

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

80

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

79

†

a
b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
The reported estimate is 310 deaths per 100,000 live births (2003 -2008) as presented in
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 2008. The estimate of 180 deaths per 100,000 live
births was developed by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter -agency Group (WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts),
adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information,
see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
These estimates are based on six years of primary school education.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia is considerably diverse in terms of culture
and ethnicity, with 60 per cent of its 10.1 million inhabitants representing
36 indigenous ethno-linguistic groups. Almost 45 per cent of its people are children.
2.
Since 2009, Bolivia has undergone a major political, economic and
socio-economic transformation and has become a lower-middle income country. 1 A
new Constitution was approved in 2009, emphasizing human rights, social equity
and political and administrative decentralization.
3.
Bolivia has very significant disparities (with a Gini coefficient of 0.51 in
2009) in many social indicators by geographic area, gender, ethnicity a nd economic
quintile. Families in the top income quintile earn 24 times more than families in the
lowest quintile. Among ethnic groups, the indigenous Amazon population suffers the
highest levels of poverty and economic and social exclusion. A male child f rom the
richest quintile living in an urban area has completed an average of 14.4 years of
__________________
1

2

World Bank threshold for country classification.

schooling, compared to 2 years for an indigenous girl from the poorest quintile
living in a rural area. 2
4.
Despite 4.6 per cent average annual economic growth between 2005 and 2011,
51 per cent of Bolivians are still poor, and 26 per cent are extremely poor. The
introduction of direct cash transfer initiatives, known as Juancito Pinto and Juana
Azurduy, and Renta Dignidad contributed to the reduction of the poverty level from
38 per cent to 26 per cent between 2005 and 2010. 3 Poverty varies widely by region
in Bolivia, and rural households account for about 48 per cent of poor people. Only
57 per cent of rural poor people have access to an improved source of water,
compared with 91 per cent of urban poor people. 4 Although poverty incidence is far
higher in the remote Amazon regions, numerically most poor people live in densely
populated areas.
5.
In 2000, Bolivia made a commitment to achieve the Millennium Developmen t
Goals. Although significant advances have been made in many sectors in recent
years, the country still faces major challenges in expanding the quality of social
services and achieving the Goals. A number of child -related indicators are lagging.
Although investment in social services increased between 2006 and 2010 at an
average of 21 per cent annually, it still represents only 8 per cent of gross domestic
product. This is well below the level required to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals with equity, as stated in the 2009 Concluding Observations of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Additionally, though public spending
grew on average 18 per cent between 2006 and 2008, institutional capacity to absorb
the budget and provide public services at decentralized levels is still limited. 5
6.
The Government has made extraordinary efforts to implement the Sistema
Unico de Salud (Unified Health System), which aims to increase coverage of health
services. Between 2003 and 2008, the neonatal mortality re mained at the same level
(27 deaths per 1,000 live births) while the infant mortality rate fell from 54 to 50 per
1,000. This is a reduction of only 1.9 per cent annually, far below the 3.9 per cent
annual reduction required to meet the target for Millenni um Development Goal 4. 6
Between 2000 and 2010, the maternal mortality ratio declined from 229 to 180 per
100,000 live births, at a rate lower than expected to reach the Mill ennium
Development Goal target. 7
7.
A large proportion of deaths among children under 5 occurs in the neonatal
period. Other main causes of death for that age group include pneumonia (21 per
cent) and diarrhoea (18 per cent).
8.
Prevention of HIV and the detection and treatment of HIV and AIDS require
substantial reinforcement, bearing in mind that in 2009 an estimated 12,000 people
were living with AIDS, but only 2 per cent of the population had been tested. The
lack of information about incidence limits the capacity to develop and implement
effective strategies. The coverage of HIV testing during pregnancy increased to
49 per cent of pregnant women in 2010, 8 and 151 HIV-positive infants are receiving
__________________
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Bolivia, Global Study on Poverty and Disparities in Children, UNICEF-UDAPE, 2010.
UDAPE, 2011.
UNICEF Bolivia, 2011, based on household surveys from 2006 and 2008.
Fiscal Atlas, Unit of Analysis of Economic and Social Policy, 2010.
Demographic and Health Survey, 2008.
UNICEF-WHO-UNFPA estimates and Demographic and Health Survey, 2003.
National STD-HIV/AIDS Programme from the Ministry of Health and Sports.

3

antiretroviral treatment, although the number is expected to increase. The major
factors affecting the vertical transmission of HIV are r elated to unmet family
planning needs and limited access to prenatal health care services.
9.
The rate of chronic malnutrition fell from 26 per cent in 2003 to 20 per cent in
2008, and it seems possible that Bolivia will achieve its target of 19 per cent by
2015 (the national goal related to Millennium Development Goal 1. In 2008, coverage
of safe water and basic sanitation remained low, at 75 per cent for water and 48 per
cent for sanitation. The situation is worse in rural zones (51 per cent for water an d
37 per cent for sanitation), with serious consequences for nutrition and health. 9
10. In the education sector, the Law Avelino Siñani-Elizardo Pérez requires
important reforms acknowledging pluralism and incorporating a culturally sensitive
approach. This is expected to increase primary school enrolment, which has
remained flat in recent years; the figure in 2010 was 86 per cent. The country faces
enormous challenges in achieving universal access to and completion of primary
education by 2015, as called for by Millennium Development Goal 2. 10 Education
quality also needs improvement, given on-time completion rates of 77 per cent for
primary school and 56 per cent for secondary school in rural areas.
11. In 2001 only 50 per cent of children under 1 year old had obtained birth
registration. 11 Only 40 per cent 12 of children aged 4 to 5 were benefiting from early
childhood education activities in 2010. A major advocacy effort is needed to extend
access to these services.
12. The Committee on the Rights of the Child, in its 2009 Concluding Observations
on the report of Bolivia, called for consolidation of a national protection system for
children to overcome the current fragmented approach to prevention and protection.
The consolidated system should be based on inclusive policies, relevant high-quality
data and analysis, increased participation by indigenous and excluded people, and
increased allocation of public resources. 13
13. In 2008, 80 per cent of the households used corporal punishment of children; 14
50 per cent of Bolivian students took part in bullying, 15 as victims, perpetrator
and/or spectators; and 60 per cent of students said they had been victims of violence
perpetrated by their teachers. Women are the main victims of violence; in 2008 up to
38 per cent of married women were victims of physical, sexual and/or psychological
violence at home. The Government has made important efforts to prevent and treat
violence against children and women, reduce child labour and human trafficking,
and make the Children, Girls and Adolescents Code consistent with the new
Political Constitution. 16
14. An average of 20,000 children each year are affected by emergencies,
including extreme droughts, floods and landslides. Many emergencies are considered
to have their roots in the effects of climate change and the El Niño and La Niña
__________________
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

4

Sixth Progress Report, Millennium Development Goals in Bolivia 2010.
Ministry of Education, Educational Information System.
National Population Census 2001.
Ministry of Education, Educational Information System 2010.
Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations, 2009.
National DHS, 2008.
Ombudsman Office, 2010.
Child Protection Study, UNICEF-UDAPE, 2008.

phenomena. During years impacted by these weather events, the number of children
affected increases up to 10 times. The Committee on the Rights of the Child pointed
out weaknesses in the response to emergencies, calling for development of a policy
based on humanitarian standards, including elements of prevention and response,
with budgetary allocations for its execution.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
15. Achievements related to policy and advocacy include the effective positioning
of children’s rights in the new Constitution; the Children, Girls and Adolescents
Code; and the acknowledgement of child-related issues in the Framework for
Autonomy and Decentralization Law and the Departmental Charters and Autonomic
Statutes. With the support of the UNICEF National Committees of Belgium, the
Netherlands, Switzerland and the United States, an integrated, child -friendly
management system was established in 47 priority municipalities, through
intersectoral municipal and departmental committees. This strategy proved to be
effective for improving social planning, developing cohesive public policies and
integrated services, and increasing incorporation of children’s rights at subnational
level.
16. With thematic support from Canada, the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency and the United States Agency for International Development,
the country programme supported implementation of the Baby-Friendly Hospital
Initiative. This contributed to efforts by the Ministry of Health to reduce chronic
malnutrition in children under 5 years old from 33 per cent in 2006 to 27 per cent in
2010 in the department of Oruro, and from 30 per cent to 11 per cent in the
departments of Beni and Pando.
17. Support from the Governments of the Netherlands and Sweden and the
UNICEF National Committees of Denmark, Finland and Germany was instrumental
in implementing the child-friendly school intercultural initiative, which involved the
participation of more than half of school-aged children in the departments of Beni,
Chuquisaca, Cochabamba, Pando and Potosí. Countrywide, 26 per cent of school aged children benefited from national and subnational child -friendly education
policies. This contributed to the 14 per cent increase in the net enrolment rate for
primary education and 6 per cent increase in the completion rate in 46 priority
municipalities.
18. With the continuous support of the Governments of Canada, the Netherlands
and Sweden and the UNICEF National Committees of France and Spain, the water
and sanitation programme successfully tested a strategy for decentralized service
provision among dispersed rural communities. In addition to strengthening nat ional
and local capacity to deliver quality services, the programme contributed to an
11.8 per cent increase in water provision and 4.4 per cent increase in basic sanitation
coverage in the 40 priority municipalities. The strategy was adopted by the Minist ry
of Environment and Water to be scaled up in all rural municipalities.
19. Under the child protection programme and with the support of the Government
of Italy and the UNICEF National Committee of the United Kingdom, child defence

5

offices were consolidated to protect the rights of child victims of physical and
psychological abuse and protect children from other flagrant violations of their rights
in 86 per cent of municipalities nationwide. Approximately 56,000 children were
properly registered at birth and over 10,000 have identity cards. The programme also
contributed to the establishment of victims and witnesses units in every department
of Bolivia. In 17 municipalities where Brazil nuts and sugar cane are harvested, the
programme contributed to improved social conditions for 2,300 families, eliminated
child labour among children under 12 years old and enrolled 3,400 children in school.
Lessons learned
20. The following lessons were identified as part of the 2008 -2012 midterm
review and in the evaluation of local development strategies:
(a) Strengthening engagement on policy dialogue increased the impact of the
country programme interventions.
(b) UNICEF should increase its evidence-informed advocacy nationally and
subnationally to ensure that the rights of the most vulnerable children are addressed
during policy formulation and budget allocation in all sectors and to develop
collaborative relationships to increase the dialogue on children’s rights. This will
raise their profile on the public agenda and ensure that public policies are
sustainable. This process needs to be accompanied by capacity building at national
and subnational levels.
(c) Models and pilots were not fully used in a strategic manner, had weak
linkages with policy, were spread over 7 departments and 167 municipalities, and
lacked a defined exit strategy. This overstretched the UNICEF capacity to help
strengthen systems at subnational level.
(d) Strategic targeting and understanding of bottlenecks are critical to
addressing disparities and fulfilling the rights of vulnerable children and women. For
UNICEF, this entails gaining better knowledge about vulnerable and disadvantaged
children and strengthening government capacity, particularly at subnational level, to
ensure that resources are translated into outcomes for the most disadvantaged groups.
(e) Greater attention is needed to implement the shift from the central level
to the subnational level in order to make decentralization work for children.
UNICEF should move from project-based service delivery to capacity development
of subnational authorities in evidence-based planning and budgeting, management
and monitoring of quality social services.

6

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 200

41 500

42 700

900

6 000

6 900

Monitoring and knowledge generation for
promotion of child rights

2 480

6 350

8 830

Cross-sectoral

2 180

6 150

8 330

Total

6 760

60 000

66 760

Quality social services with equity
Protection of children and adolescents

Preparation process
21. The country programme was prepared in conformity with the plan agreed with
the Ministry of Planning and Development. The key results and lessons learned
arose from the 2010 midterm review, while the 2010 situation analysis and the 2011
National Poverty Study were used to identify the major challenges faced by children
and women. Several consultations were held with Ministries and representatives
from civil society, non-governmental organizations and children’s and women’s
groups. Finally, a reference group was formed with representatives from the
Government, other United Nations agencies and donors to discuss and validate the
strategies, which relate to the goals of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF).
Programme components, results and strategies
22. The country programme will support the Government of Bolivia in realizing
the rights of children by positioning them at the centre of national and subnational
public policies, programmes and budgets. The programme will focus on addressing
vulnerabilities and reducing geographic, social, gender and cultural disparities as an
essential way to achieve the Millennium Development Goals with equity.
23. The programme includes three components: (a) quality social services with
equity; (b) protection of children and adolescents; and (c) monitoring and
knowledge generation for the promotion of child rights.
24. The programme will contribute to reduction of maternal, neonatal and infant
mortality and chronic malnutrition; increased access to and completion of quality
education at early childhood, primary and secondary levels; protection of children
and adolescents and prevention of all forms of violence; and reduction of child
disparities and poverty.
25. Bearing in mind the current decentralization process, reducing disparitie s will
largely depend on the technical capacity and political will of local governments. The
programme will focus on the rights of indigenous and excluded children in isolated
rural communities and urban marginal areas in at least 30 municipalities in the
departments of Beni, Pando, Chuquisaca, Potosí, Cochabamba and Oruro and the
Chaco region, where the population is mostly indigenous. UNICEF will support

7

capacity strengthening of local governments in coordination with relevant ministries.
UNICEF will support the participation of duty bearers and rights holders to promote
ownership and programme sustainability and relevancy.
26. With human rights, gender mainstreaming and equality as overarching
approaches, the programme will use a mix of strategies. These will include
(a) strengthening national and subnational institutional capacities to effectively plan,
budget, implement, monitor and evaluate child-friendly, intercultural and gendersensitive policies and programmes for children and adolescents; (b) enhancing
strategic partnerships and collaborative relationships for corporate social
responsibility; (c) increasing collaboration with centres of excellence for knowledge
generation; (d) documenting and disseminating best practices for South -South
cooperation and knowledge exchanges among countries with relevant experience;
and (e) strengthening capacity development for disaster risk red uction, emergency
preparedness and response.
Programme components
27. Quality social services with equity. This component aims at strengthening
government capacity to deliver quality social services at the subnational level while
influencing policies and programmes at the national and municipal level. It will also
contribute to achievement of social, cultural and environmental rights as strategic
areas of the UNDAF.
28. This component will contribute to addressing issues related to: (a) disparities
in health and nutrition outcomes; (b) unsafe drinking water sources, poor sanitation
and hygiene services, and the impact of climate change and natural disasters on
children; (c) lack of early childhood education services among poor communities;
(d) low enrolment levels and poor quality of education, particularly at preschool and
primary levels among vulnerable populations, and insufficient adaptation of the
curriculum to reflect socio-cultural and linguistic diversity; (e) low rate of transition
to secondary education and high rate of dropout among adolescents.
29. The specific programme results by 2017 under this component are reduction of
maternal, infant and neonatal mortality, chronic malnutrition and vertical transmission
of HIV; and increased access to and completion of culturally appropriate early-child,
pre-primary primary and lower secondary education at the appropriate age.
30. Cooperation strategies include: (a) providing technical assistance to improve
policies and increase access to and uptake of quality social services by poor and
excluded children; (b) developing institutional capacity in human resources,
particularly in the most excluded and disadvantaged areas; (c) improving health and
education information, monitoring and evaluation systems, including at local level;
(d) incorporating intercultural and gender-based approaches; (e) documenting lessons
learned to improve governance, services and resource allocation; and (f) promoting
tools to improve the life skills, empowerment and behaviour c hange of adolescents
based on their rights.
31. UNICEF will support policy-related analysis, research and piloting of new
approaches to improve access to and delivery of quality social services. At a
minimum the cooperation will take place in the departme nts of Beni, Pando, Potosí,
Cochabamba, Chuquisaca, La Paz and Oruro and the Chaco region. The main
partners of this component will be the Ministries of Health, Autonomies, Education,

8

Environment and Water, Economy and Public Finances, and Planning and
Development.
32. Protection of children and adolescents. This component will focus on
consolidating the child protection system at national and subnational levels to
protect the most vulnerable and excluded children — including children with
disabilities as well as adolescents and women — from violence, abuse and
exploitation. UNICEF role will focus on providing technical support for capacity
building to enable provision of (a) quality services to prevent and protect children
and adolescents from risks, including during emergencies; (b) family -based
interventions to mitigate protection risks; (c) child -friendly and gender-sensitive
justice procedures; and (d) diversion interventions, including alternative measures to
deprivation of liberty for children and adolescents in conflict with the law. The
component will also build institutional capacity to improve birth registration. The
programme will contribute to the UNDAF outcome related to civil and political
rights.
33. This component will contribute to: (a) supporting reform of legal and public
policies for protection of children’s rights; (b) strengthening the coordination,
management and monitoring mechanisms of the child protection system, including
the development of protocols and referral mechanisms; (c) improving routine data
collection mechanisms to support analysis of key child protection indicators at
national and subnational levels, as a tool for policy formulation, planning and
budget allocations; and (d) increasing social mobilization and communication to
promote a culture of respect for the rights of children and adolescents.
34. The results expected by 2017 are that children and adolescents, especially the
most vulnerable, are protected by an enhanced legal and policy fra mework in the
areas of social welfare, law reform and the justice system, and that they have access
to child protection programmes and services (including timely birth registration) to
prevent and protect them from violence, abuse and exploitation. This co mponent
will focus on the departments of Beni, Pando, Potosí, Chuquisaca and Cochabamba
and the sugar cane harvest region of Santa Cruz.
35. The main partners of this component will be the Ministries of Justice and
Labour, the Electoral Tribunal, Justice Court, State Attorney’s Office,
Ombudsperson’s Office, local governments, the private sector, non -governmental
organizations and universities.
36. Monitoring and knowledge generation for promotion of child rights. This
programme component supports the government’s National Development Plan to
advance the well-being and rights of children and women. Support will be given to
all other programme components, with a focus on budgeting, social protection,
evidence-based advocacy, knowledge management, media relations and privatesector partnerships.
37. This component will contribute to the reduction of inequities and disparities in
access to basic social services. It will emphasize (a) enhancing national and
subnational capacities for timely collection, analysis and dissemination of
disaggregated data; (b) monitoring and analysing social service budgets;
(c) assessing the effectiveness of social protection systems in delivering results on
child rights; and (d) evidence-based advocacy for child-friendly policies and budget

9

allocation. This component contributes to the achievement of the UNDAF outcomes
related to civil, political and economic rights.
38. Anticipated programme component results by 2017 are that child disparity
across all sectors is reduced through enhanced monitoring (with disaggregated
statistics) and evaluation systems, child-friendly policies and programmes, and
evidence-based planning and resource allocation at national and subnational levels;
and that children and young people express themselves to influence policies and
practices affecting their lives.
39. A critical dimension of this component consists of strengthening national and
subnational capacities to monitor implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women.
40. To ensure effective advocacy, the component will expand and strengthen
UNICEF partnerships with the National Institute of Statistics and the Political and
Economic Analysis Unit; the Ministries of Planning and Development, Economy
and Public Finances, and Autonomies; and the Plurinational Assembly, the judicial
sector and the Ombudsperson’s Office; as well as departmental and municipal
governments, non-governmental and faith-based organizations, international financing
institutions, the media, academic and research institutions, and the private sector.
41. Cross-sectoral. The cross-sectoral component will contribute to the effective
and efficient management and coordination of the countr y programme. This
component will ensure integrated management of the country programme and
technical and administrative support to local and technical teams. This component
will also provide technical support for gender mainstreaming, communication, risk
management, disaster risk reduction and emergency preparedness and response.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
42. The country programme will contribute to the Government ’s priorities
established in the Constitution and the National Development Plan, which focus on
increasing development and inclusion in order to guarantee quality of life for the
entire population.
43. The programme is synchronized with the UNDAF and will directly contribute
to three of its results: (a) Bolivia will have increased its institutional capacity to
protect and guarantee the rights of its whole population; (b) Bolivia will have
strengthened political participation and the culture of peace and coexistence; and
(c) Bolivia will have strengthened its mechanisms of protection of the people who
are discriminated against and excluded and whose rights have been violated.
Relationship to international priorities
44. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the 2009 Concluding Observations by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. It supports the principles of A World Fit for Children, the Millennium
Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals and other international goals
endorsed by the Government. The programme builds on the principles of the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and its follow-up actions, which aim at
strengthening government ownership of development programmes while ensuring a

10

coordinated approach among development partners. The programme will support
implementation of the regional education goals endorsed by the Government.
Major partnerships
45. UNICEF will support and strengthen the work of the Plurinational Assembly
and the Ombudsperson, as well as the Ministries of Planning and Development,
Health and Sports, Education, Environment and Water, and Justice, plus the
Supreme Court, State Attorney’s Office, Political and Economic Analysis Unit,
National Institute of Statistics and departmental and municipal governments and
indigenous groups. The UNICEF-Government relationship will be managed by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Planning and Development.
46. In the context of collaboration with Bolivian social-sector ministries, UNICEF
will support organizations of community-based and indigenous groups, children,
youth and women, as well as the private sector, mass media, universities, re search
centres and non-governmental organizations.
47. The country programme will cooperate with all entities of the United Nations
system, especially the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Population Fund and the World Food Programme,
the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Corporación Andina
de Fomento (Latin American development bank) to address child poverty and
disparities.
48. UNICEF will strengthen partnerships with the private sector in Bolivia and with
National Committees for UNICEF. It will coordinate its support to the Government
of Bolivia through current donors and sectoral coordination instruments. UNICEF
will continue its partnerships with the United States Agency for I nternational
Development, European Union, Canadian International Development Agency,
Swedish Government and bilateral cooperation agencies.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
49. Monitoring and evaluation of the situation of children and women in Bolivia
will be a central aspect of the country programme. The five -year Integrated
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will examine and evaluate programme activities
and management.
50. UNICEF will implement a more strategic approach to evaluation. T his
includes managing and advocating for the evaluation function rather than
implementing it; coordinating evaluation in line with the Paris Declaration and the
UNDAF; and building strategic partnerships by supporting local evaluation
associations. Investments in knowledge management will support the commitment
of UNICEF to be a knowledge leader for children while meeting the demand for
evidence to replicate successful programmes.
51. Country programme monitoring will cover national and subnational levels.
DevInfo will be used to manage, present and share data. Subnational monitoring of
the Millennium Development Goals and the situation of children and women will
support evidence-based advocacy.
52. A midterm review will be held in 2015, coordinated with other United Nations
entities. More effective and regular field and monitoring visits focused on cross -

11

sectoral linkages and the development, documentation and replication of sound
models will strengthen programme coordination.
53. The Vice-Ministry of Public Expenditures and External Financing will be the
UNICEF counterpart for monitoring and reviewing the country programme, and it
will coordinate national and subnational reviews. For the midterm review, an
evaluation of the UNICEF role at subnational levels will assess the organization’s
contribution to the achievement of results for children at decentralized levels.

12

