E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
19 August 2014
Original: English
French
Spanish
For action

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2014
9-12 September 2014
Item 5 (b) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document**
Bosnia and Herzegovina

Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Bosnia and Herzegovina is
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and comments. The Executive Board
is requested to approve the aggregate indicative budget of $4,270,000 from regular
resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $25,730,000 in other resources,
subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period 2015 to
2019.

* E/ICEF/2014/14.
** In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document reflects comments
made by Executive Board members on a draft version that was shared with them 12 weeks before
the 2014 second regular session of the Executive Board.

14-59463 (E)

190814

*1459463*

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

Programme rationale
1. Bosnia and Herzegovina is an upper-middle-income country and potential
candidate for membership in the European Union (EU). The country is highly
decentralized, with most government functions delegated to the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (which has 10 cantonal governments), Republika Srpska and District of
Brcko, as per the structure defined in the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.1
Governance issues in a complex structure and economic crisis have slowed the pace of
reforms, and important challenges remain for the equitable realization of the rights of all
children.
2. One of the most critical issues is the fact that more than half of the population (58
per cent) is poor or socially excluded and at risk of poverty or exclusion 2. This is
expected to increase after the unprecedented floods that hit Bosnia and Herzegovina in May
2014. The situation is particularly difficult for vulnerable families and children: children
with disabilities; children of minorities, including Roma; and children in impoverished
communities.3 With UNICEF support, social protection and inclusion systems have been
strengthened and 23 per cent of the country’s municipalities have established special
services for the most vulnerable children and families. These include day-care services for
children with disabilities and mobile outreach teams for out-of-school Roma and rural
children.4 However, challenges persist. The main bottlenecks include inefficient targeting
of social assistance (only one quarter of poor people are reached), as pointed out by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child;5 unharmonized legislation and fragmented systems,
which prevent minimum benefits from reaching all vulnerable families; increasing yet
insufficient coordination mechanisms within and between sectors; lack of capacities among
social workers; and limited outreach activities.
3. Attendance in early childhood education increased from just 6 per cent in 2006 to 13
per cent6 in 2012, but that proportion falls to 1.5 per cent among Roma children and 2 per
cent among children from the poorest quintile. 7 Through UNICEF advocacy with the
Government, preschool education gained momentum, and almost half of the country’s
children (46 per cent) 8 have begun attending minimum preschool programmes prior to first
grade, as required by the legislative framework. Initial efforts have been made to introduce
systematic early detection of developmental delays and appropriate interventions.
Remaining bottlenecks include lack of budget allocation, fees that prevent enrolment of

1

www.ccbh.ba/public/down/USTAV_BOSNE_I_HERCEGOVINE_engl.pdf;
www.ohr.int/print/?content_id=5907; www.ohr.int/const/rs/default.asp?content_id=5908
2
William Bartlett, ‘Gap analysis in the area of social protection and inclusion policies in BiH’, UNICEF,
2013, p. 13, table 2.
3
Multiple indicator cluster survey (MICS4) data; Extended household budget survey (EHBS) 2011;
Initiative for Better and Humane Inclusion (IBHI) Report on Poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013;
World Bank data; UNICEF Bosnia and Herzegovina, Report on the Situation of Roma children and
families in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013
4
Data gathered through programme monitoring and evaluation.
5
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CRC/C/BIH/CO/24&Lang=En
6
14.4 per cent Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, 10.3 per cent Republika Srpska.
7
MICS4, 14 male, 12.2 female; for Roma, 1.6 female, 1.4 male.
8
UNICEF monitoring and evaluation section calculated this percentage using official government statistics:
65 per cent Republika Srpska; 37 per cent Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

2/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

vulnerable children, insufficient capacities, service providers’ prejudices towards children
with disabilities and Roma children, and limited implementation of inclusive curricula.
4. Another critical issue is equity gaps in education. While attendance is high, at 98 per
cent in primary education9 and 92 per cent in secondary education, 10 for Roma children
these figures drop to 69 per cent and 23 per cent respectively. The rate is 27 per cent for
Roma boys and 18 per cent for Roma girls (secondary education). As noted by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child in its 2012 concluding observations on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, access to education remains limited for children with disabilities, and ethnic
division persists.11 The main bottlenecks preventing access to systematic, high-quality,
inclusive education include data gaps; prejudice against minority ethnic groups (of which
the largest is Roma) and children with disabilities; limited teacher capacities; and low
demand by parents. Additionally, unemployment is very high, at 28 per cent12 overall and
63 per cent among young people – evidence of a gap between the education system and the
labour market.
5. With UNICEF support, a legislative framework is in place for integrated early
childhood development (IECD). Services have started to expand, including home visiting
to reach marginalized families, which now reaches 10 per cent of Bosnia and Herzegovina
municipalities,13 with most services for the most vulnerable families. Challenges persist
with early detection of developmental delays and adequate interventions. Immunization
levels remain low, at 68 per cent overall14 and a dismal 4 per cent for Roma children, 15 and
equity gaps persist among children under 5 and in infant mortality and malnutrition.
Bottlenecks include insufficient resources, low awareness of services among hard-to-reach
population groups and a limited number of qualified staff.
6. Juvenile offences have fallen by approximately 10 per cent overall since 2010. The
decline has been larger, 16 per cent and 30 per cent16 respectively, in the third and fourth
largest cities (Tuzla and Zenica), where the UNICEF-supported ‘Justice for Children’
programme was implemented. However, the Committee on the Rights of the Child continues
to be concerned with insufficient alternative measures to detention and forms of rehabilitation
for children in conflict with the law. It recommended the development and strengthening of
systems to recognize the rights of children to express their views in relevant legal
proceedings.17 Bottlenecks for further progress include both service providers’ limited
capacity to ensure children have access to justice and scarce awareness among children and
their families about the services available to them.
7. The Transformative Monitoring for Enhanced Equity (TransMonEE) database 18
indicates a high rate of children in residential care, reaching 276 per 100,000 in 2011.

9

97.2 per cent Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, 98.9 per cent Republika Srpska. Primary education in
Bosnia and Herzegovina refers to grades 1-9.
10
92.0 per cent Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, 91.6 per cent Republika Srpska.
11
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CRC/C/BIH/CO/24&Lang=En
12
26.4 per cent men and 30.7 per cent women, International Labour Organization 2012.
13
IECD services are available in 15 municipalities.
14
67.0 per cent Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, 71.6 per cent Republika Srpska.
15
MICS4.
16
Calculation by UNICEF monitoring and evaluation staff based on government statistics.
17
Report of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, 2012, p. 8, paragraph 33. In April 2014, Republika
Srpska passed an amendment to the Family Law that calls for children to participate in relevant family
legal proceedings affecting them.
18
www.transmonee.org/index.html.

3/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

Major bottlenecks to lowering this number include insufficient family support services,
weak foster care systems, low awareness on alternatives to institutions and weak capacities
among social workers. Only 3 per cent of the population is interested in becoming a foster
caregiver,19 and almost none want to serve in that role for children with disabilities, who
represent 67 per cent20 of all children in institutions. More than half of the country’s
children (55 per cent)21 are subjected to violent discipline methods at home. In general,
cases of violence, neglect and abuse against children are considered a family matter by
the general public. Some progress has been achieved, but child protection bottlenecks
remain, including limited awareness and service providers’ weak capacity in detecting,
reporting and addressing cases of violence.
8. As demonstrated by the May 2014 massive floods, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
vulnerable to natural disasters - such as floods, landslides, extreme temperatures,
earthquakes. The Bosnia and Herzegovina governments at all levels have started
developing new measures needed to address the risk of floods and other natural disasters,
including mitigation measures.
9. As documented in the Joint Country-Led Evaluation on Social Protection and
Inclusion (SPI)22 and an independent evaluation of the Justice for Children programme, one
of the key lessons learned from the previous programme was the importance of human
rights-based cross-sectoral approaches. Cross-sectoral coordination mechanisms at all
levels were instrumental in promoting local ownership and strengthening collaboration
between sectors. The strong convening power of UNICEF and its recognized ability to
partner with governments and civil society, as highlighted in the midterm review,
contributed to fostering this coordination, which helps in addressing the multiple
deprivations faced by the most vulnerable children.
10. Another lesson learned, documented by the joint SPI evaluation and the MTR, has
been the effectiveness of combining support for system reforms with the development of
robust and innovative models that shape and operationalize policy development and
legislative changes, focusing on the most vulnerable groups. To overcome the initial
challenge of expansion and sustainability, the programme undertook a strategic shift to
mainstream early childhood development (ECD) services into existing health services. This
enabled a strong multisectoral focus and progressive scaling-up of such services. A similar
strategy was adopted to expand early childhood education into primary schools, saving
resources and ensuring sustainable enrolment growth.
11. Finally, the success of capacity development programmes depends on their
institutionalization, which ensures expansion and sustainability. This finding was
documented in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and the
Justice for Children evaluations.

Programme priorities and partnerships
19

Knowledge, attitudes and practices survey on fostering and violence against children, UNICEF Bosnia
and Herzegovina, 2013.
20
www.transmonee.org
21
MICS4, p. 203.
22
The Joint Country-Led Evaluation on Social Protection and Inclusion was conducted in 2011/2012,
jointly with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Civil Affairs, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Republika Srpska Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Brcko
District and other ministries.

4/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

12. The overall goal of the country programme is to support the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to accelerate the universal realization of child rights by fostering greater social
inclusion, especially of the most vulnerable and excluded children and families: children
with disabilities, children of minorities, especially Roma, and children in impoverished
communities. This is to be done by reducing disparities and inequities and strengthening
social cohesion among groups. The programme will contribute to implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, as well as achievement of the post-2015 development agenda. Key priorities
will include child rights monitoring, social protection, justice for children, early childhood
education and young child well-being for all children, including children with disabilities
and Roma children.
13. The programme will address key bottlenecks by working to (a) improve the enabling
environment by facilitating cross-sectoral coordination and strengthening capacities to
design, implement and budget for child-related policies and laws; (b) strengthen systems
and capacities for equitable provision of quality and innovative services, especially for the
most vulnerable children; and (c) enhance demand by advocating for reduced fees,
demonstrating quality service provision, promoting outreach and empowering rightsholders, especially the most vulnerable families.
14. The programme will (a) facilitate a national dialogue on child-friendly social norms,
including through communication for social change to trigger positive changes in
behaviours and attitudes; (b) advocate as a strong and independent voice for children and
adolescents; (c) help strengthen systems to monitor child rights; (d) leverage resources for
children; (e) contribute to strengthening capacities to provide effective and innovative
services, and facilitate the costing and assessment of policy models and programmes; (f)
provide evidence-based policy advice and technical expertise; and (g) enable knowledge
exchange. These core roles reflect the foundational normative principles of the human
rights-based approach to development, gender mainstreaming and environmental
sustainability. In addition they match the implementation strategies of the UNICEF
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017, and regional strategies.
15. The programme will also closely identify and monitor assumptions and risks for the
achievement of expected results. These include political developments that could jeopardize
reform processes and result in social unrest, as well as natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes and extreme temperatures. UNICEF will continue to support efforts by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to strengthen disaster risk reduction (DRR), response and resilience.

Child rights monitoring, social protection and inclusion
16. This programme component, which complements and supports the others, seeks to
strengthen the country’s capacity to monitor child rights, reduce poverty and provide
inclusive access to social protection services, especially for the most disadvantaged
children.
17. The programme will support effective child rights monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms, including systematic gathering, analysis and use of disaggregated data.
Priorities will comprise harmonizing social statistics data, facilitating coordination and
strengthening capacities of relevant ministries, ombudspersons and the media. UNICEF
will support responsible government institutions and civil society networks in reporting to

5/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The programme will advocate for realization of
all children’s rights with equity and will promote child participation.
18. Building on progress made on reform of the social protection and inclusion sector,
the programme will seek to reduce poverty and address equity gaps. This will be achieved
through advocacy and technical assistance for legislation and policies, evidence-based
budget reallocations, knowledge exchange and inclusive social protection systems. The
programme will continue to promote expansion of the SPI model through system change
and increased coverage at local level23 through multisectoral commissions; vulnerability
needs assessments; systematic participation of children, families and civil society; referral
protocols; municipal action plans; and provision of services to the most vulnerable children.
19. This will be coupled with systematic modelling, documentation of lessons learned,
sharing of best practices and costing analysis to leverage knowledge and influence laws,
budgets and SPI systems in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Efforts will also be made to further
strengthen systems and the resilience of children, families and communities so they will be
better prepared to recover from the devastating May 2014 floods and to respond to other
natural disasters and emergencies. Efforts will contribute to the following key results: (a)
Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a harmonized approach to
equitable minimum social benefits; (b) vulnerable children have access to enhanced
inclusive services (such as day-care centres for children with disabilities) in 50 per cent of
municipalities; and (c) an increased percentage of people support inclusion of children with
disabilities.

Child protection and justice for children
20. This programme component focuses on strengthening child protection systems, which
will contribute to realizing children’s right to be free from violence, neglect and abuse,
including the right to live in a family environment, as well as children’s access to justice.
21. The programme will provide technical assistance to strengthen capacities and promote
cross-sectoral collaboration in order to prevent and respond to cases of violence, neglect,
abuse and family separation. Evidence-based advocacy will aim at leveraging resources
to implement alternatives to institutionalization, such as foster care. It will also support
transformation of existing institutions to provide services to prevent family separation,
particularly for children with disabilities. UNICEF will be the independent voice for
children and adolescents. It will continue to play a key convening role in promoting
multisectoral child protection referral mechanisms and violence prevention programmes in
at least 40 per cent of all municipalities.
22. Professional development programmes will improve the capacity of social workers in
managing child protection cases. Coupled with targeted behavioural change campaigns,
these efforts will contribute to (a) reducing by at least 40 per cent the number of children in
institutions; (b) reducing from 68 per cent to 40 per cent the proportion of children with
disabilities in residential care; and (c) increasing the percentage of municipalities
implementing the guidelines on the response system in cases of violence against children.
23. Building on previous achievements in juvenile justice, the programme will strengthen
children’s access to justice. Technical assistance will be provided to increase the use of
child-friendly and gender-sensitive proceedings by the police, courts and prosecutors’

23

6/18

Criteria to select additional municipalities will include size, number of children and magnitude of
vulnerability/barriers to access to services.

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

offices. UNICEF will strengthen the capacities of legal aid providers to assist children and
their families involved in criminal, civil and administrative proceedings as part of the
overall goal to increase the number of children accessing the justice system. Technical
assistance, knowledge exchange and local modelling of community-based alternative and
diversion measures will inform policy development and strengthen pre-service and inservice capacity development for professionals. The programme will advocate for
reallocation of resources for new services, emphasizing secondary and tertiary prevention.
This will contribute to an increase in (a) the number of prosecutors’ offices and municipal
courts applying child-friendly procedures and (b) the percentage of children in conflict with
the law benefiting from diversion and alternative measures.

Inclusive quality education
24. The programme will support efforts to ensure the progressive realization of every
child’s right to inclusive learning through advocacy, capacity development, technical
assistance and leveraging of resources. UNICEF will play a convening role in enhancing
coordination across the various levels of governance and between education and other
sectors.
25. In the area of inclusive early learning, the programme will support the continued
expansion of preschool education programmes. It will use communication for social change
to increase awareness on the importance of early childhood education, as well as inclusive
and intercultural education. The programme will also support initiatives to increase the
skills and capacities of professionals and promote adequate nutrition in preschools. At least
30 per cent of children will be enrolled in full preschool education programmes, including
children with disabilities and Roma children. The programme will also support the
transition from pre-primary to primary school.
26. To support the realization of children’s right to inclusive quality primary and
secondary education, the programme will address data gaps and identify invisible and
excluded children. In line with the ‘Call for Action on Education Equity’, UNICEF will
advocate for the importance of universal access and intercultural education; support
inclusion of all children, particularly children from minority groups and children with
disabilities; and strengthen capacities of teachers and other professionals on inclusive and
intercultural education, social cohesion and equity.
27. UNICEF will also foster a dialogue on the quality of education with a focus on
assessment of learning outcomes and equity gaps. Interventions will target communities
with very low attendance rates. In addition, the programme will promote entrepreneurial
learning in primary and secondary education through non-formal education to strengthen
the skills of students and better prepare them for the labour market. It will also work to
build resilience among pupils and school staff so they are better prepared for natural
disasters. The main expected result will be increased attendance in primary and secondary
education by Roma boys and girls (90 per cent primary and 50 per cent secondary,) and
children with disabilities.

Young child well-being
28. This programme component aims at achieving equitable access to and use of quality
IECD services, particularly for vulnerable and excluded families with young children, such
as Roma, and families with children with developmental difficulties.

7/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

29. Building on previous IECD achievements, remaining bottlenecks will be addressed
through the expansion of IECD and early childhood intervention (ECI) services, including
home visiting. UNICEF will leverage resources to improve access to quality IECD services
for children with disabilities, Roma children and children from impoverished areas. The
programme will support the adoption of intersectoral IECD action plans and budgets in 80
per cent of the cantons and 35 per cent of all municipalities; professional development
programmes in IECD/ECI for health, social welfare and preschool professionals; and
development of parenting skills and encouragement of equal involvement of mothers and
fathers. Bosnia and Herzegovina will contribute to knowledge exchange within the country
and globally through research, monitoring and evaluation, which will inform policy
development. As a result, at least 35,000 children up to age 5 and their families will receive
quality IECD and ECI services, including home visiting. The model will be expanded
through system changes.
30. Immunization will be supported, particularly to reduce the risk of wild polio virus, 24
by closing equity gaps and addressing remaining bottlenecks, especially those related to
social norms, service outreach and surveillance systems. This work will take place in close
collaboration with government authorities and the World Health Organization. UNICEF
will support the country in achieving European immunization targets. It will advocate for
targeted immunization programmes, especially for Roma children, and will use
communication for social change to address the anti-vaccine sentiment and restore trust in
immunization.
31. The country programme supports key priorities outlined in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Plan of Action for Children for 2011-2014. The results are aligned with goals
and targets identified at various levels of governance. The programme contributes to
government sector strategies in justice, social protection and inclusion, health, IECD,
education and children without parental care. It is also in line with key legislation and
policy documents such as the Bosnia and Herzegovina Disability Policy (2008), Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina Strategy for Persons with Disabilities (2011-2015), District of
Brcko Development Strategy and Social Inclusion Strategy (2008-2017), Republika Srpska
Juvenile Justice Law (2010), Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Juvenile Justice Act
(2013), Republika Srpska Law on Social Protection, Bosnia and Herzegovina Strategy on
Violence against Children (2011), Bosnia and Herzegovina Strategic Directions for the
Development of Preschool Education and Care (2004), Framework Law for Preschool
Education and Care (2007), Strategic Directions for the Development of Education and
2008-2015 implementing plan (2008), Framework Law for Primary and Secondary
Education (2003), Bosnia and Herzegovina ECD Framework Policy (2012); Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska ECD policies (2011); Republika Srpska
Health Policy 2020; and nutrition policies for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(2013) and Republika Srpska (2012).
32. The new country programme derives directly from the UNDAF 2015-2019. It will
contribute specifically to the achievement of 10 of the 13 outcomes under 4 focus areas: (1)
sustainable and equitable development and employment (outcome on education and
employability); (2) social inclusion (outcomes on education, social protection, child
protection and health); (3) empowerment of women (outcome related to gender-based

24

8/18

Bosnia and Herzegovina is at high risk for substantial wild polio virus transmission, as stated in the report
of the 27th Meeting of the European Regional Certification Commission for Poliomyelitis Eradication,
Copenhagen, 30–31 May 2013, p. 5.

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

violence); and (4) rule of law and human security (outcomes on justice, peacebuilding and
DRR). The country programme has been developed with and will be implemented in close
collaboration with other United Nations agencies.
33. The country programme is based on the principles of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other relevant international
instruments. It supports the 2012 concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child. The programme is in accordance with the EU 2020 Strategy on Social
Inclusion and Strategy on Roma. It is in line with the post-2015 development agenda and
the Hyogo Framework for Action. In addition, the programme contributes to the Regional
Knowledge Management and Leadership Agenda of the UNICEF office for Central and
Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
34. The country programme will be implemented in close partnerships with ministries and
other government bodies at all levels of governance in line with the mandates of relevant
institutions. The focus on multisectoral coordination will continue.
35. Alliances with civil society, celebrities and the media will continue to be critical in
engaging society in promoting the progressive realization of the rights of all children.
Efforts will be intensified to engage with parliamentarians, ombudspersons, the academic
community, human rights institutions, youth organizations, associations of parents of
children with disabilities, Roma organizations, the private sector and citizens.
36. Close collaboration will continue with the EU to place children’s rights on the
accession agenda; with the World Bank and the United States Agency for International
Development on social protection and inclusion; with the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency on
justice for children; and with Dubai Cares on early childhood education. The country
programme will also leverage a growing diversity of partnerships to promote cooperation
within the country and across countries.

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Child rights monitoring, social protection and
inclusion

880

6 620

7 500

Child protection and justice for children

755

6 245

7 000

Inclusive quality education

880

8 120

9 000

Young child well-being

755

3 745

4 500

1 000

1 000

2 000

4 270

25 730

30 000

Cross-sectoral
Total

9/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

Programme and risk management
37. This country programme document outlines the UNICEF contributions to Bosnia and
Herzegovina results. It serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board
for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level.
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect
to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations
policies and procedures and the internal controls framework.
38. Main risks for the achievement of expected results relate to governance and
accountability; safety and security in light of the fragile political situation; capacity of the
country to recover from the May 2014 floods; and to funding and external stakeholder
relations due to the shrinking funding for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Mitigation measures
include risk-informed planning; maintaining close relationships and partnerships with all
levels of governance; establishing permanent multisectoral commissions; diversifying and
leveraging funding sources; closely monitoring implementation of the Harmonized
Approach to Cash Transfers; preventing wild poliovirus importation in collaboration with
government partners and the World Health Organization; and strengthening emergency
preparedness and response.
39. The United Nations country team will establish relevant mechanisms to coordinate
planning, implementation monitoring and evaluation of the UNDAF. Annual or twiceyearly work plans will be developed together with government partners to operationalize
the country programme. When appropriate, the work plans will be developed jointly with
other United Nations country team members.
40. UNICEF will continue to consolidate strategic partnerships involving funding with
the EU, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, Swedish International
Development Cooperation and Dubai Cares, among others. Funding opportunities for
regional programmes will be explored in coordination with neighbouring countries.
UNICEF will mobilize resources for joint United Nations programmes by strengthening
partnerships with multi-donor trust funds, bilateral donors and other potential donors.
Opportunities for partnerships with the private sector will also be explored.

Monitoring and evaluation
41. In monitoring progress towards realization of child rights, the country programme will
focus on barriers and bottlenecks faced by the most disadvantaged children and families.
Technical assistance to strengthen real-time monitoring systems and reporting will be
provided to responsible institutions, such as the Council for Children, ministries, the
statistics sector and civil society partners.
42. Baselines will be calculated using the 2011/2012 multiple indicator cluster survey
(MICS) and other data. Additional assessments related to child poverty and marginalized
groups will be conducted to monitor trends in disparities, including in gender. The situation
analysis will be regularly updated. A fully costed evaluation plan is available on the
UNICEF Executive Board website. Major planned evaluations will cover ECD/ECI,
education, social protection and inclusion, and justice for children. The programme will
systematically track progress against planned results through mid-year and annual reviews.

10/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

43. Results are being documented as part of the Regional Knowledge Management and
Leadership Agenda. The findings of independent regional multi-country evaluations will
inform programming and policymaking and will contribute to cooperation among countries.
44. UNICEF will continue to strengthen performance, accountability and coherence, as
called for by the United Nations General Assembly following the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, including through reporting results across agencies. In
particular, UNICEF will lead the United Nations Results Group on Social Inclusion in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

11/18

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.12

Annex
Results and resources framework
Bosnia and Herzegovina -UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2015-2019
Convention on the Rights of the Child, especially articles 2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 39, 40
National priorities: Strategic Directions for the Development of Preschool Education and Care in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH); Framework Law for
Preschool Education and Care; Education Strategy of Republika Srpska (RS) 2010-2014; Law on Preschool Education in RS; Law on Primary Education of
RS; Law on Secondary Education of RS; Strategic Directions for the Development of Education with the implementing plan for the period 2008-2015;
Framework Law for Primary and Secondary Education in BiH; BiH Disability Policy (2008); RS Juvenile Justice Law; Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (FBiH) Juvenile Justice Act; RS Law on Social Protection; Strategy for Persons with Disability in FBiH (2011-2015); RS Social Protection
Strategy; Brcko District (BD) District Development Strategy and Social Inclusion Strategy, including Action Plan for Children (2008-2017); BiH ECD
Framework Policy; ECD Policy in RS; ECD Policy in FBiH; Health Strategy in RS until 2020; Nutrition Policy in FBiH and RS.
UNDAF outcomes involving UNICEF:
Outcome 1: By 2019, access to justice, non-discrimination and equality under the rule of law is improved
Indicator 1.1: Extent to which targeted legal and policy mechanisms are implemented in accordance with international standards
Baseline: 2014 Universal Periodic Review (UPR)
Target: Number of 2014 UPR recommendations accepted and implemented by 2019
Indicator 1.2: Per cent increase in juveniles diverted from formal proceedings
Baseline: FBiH and RS: 17 correctional recommendations issued in 2012
Target: 50% increase by 2019
Outcome 2: By 2019, Bosnia and Herzegovina consolidates and strengthens mechanisms for peaceful resolution of conflicts, reconciliation, respect for
diversity and community security
Indicator 2.1: Number of children benefiting from armed violence prevention programmes
Baseline: 5,000 children (2013)
Target: additional 10,000 children (2019)
Outcome 3: By 2019, there is effective management of war remnants and strengthened prevention and responsiveness for manmade and natural disasters
Indicator 3.1: Number of policies, strategies and laws that incorporate DRR concepts at municipal, entity and state level
Baseline: Two parallel entity non-coordinated platforms for DRR (2013)
Target: Six municipalities with developed strategies and plans responding to DRR (2016); coordinated entity and state platform supported by the Ministry of
Security BiH (2017)
Outcome 6: By 2019, better articulated and coordinated evidence-based employment, education and scientific policies and programmes enable greater
access to productive employment and income opportunities

Indicator 6.1: Number of primary and secondary schools that provide entrepreneurial learning opportunities to students
Baseline: 30 primary schools, 50 secondary schools (2013)
Target: 300 primary schools, 200 secondary schools (2019)
Outcome 7: By 2019, all children and young people, including children with disabilities (CwD) and Roma children, benefit from education tailored to their
needs and abilities
Indicator 7.1: Net attendance rate of all children, CwD and Roma children for primary and secondary education
Baseline: BiH: 97.6% primary (97.7% male, 97.6% female); 91.8% secondary (90.4% male, 93.1% female); Roma: 69.3% primary (70.9% male, 67.8%
female); 22.6% secondary (26.6% male,18% female); CwD: 0.4% primary (2007)
Target: BiH: Primary, 100%; secondary, 95%; Roma: primary, 90%; secondary, 50% (2019); CwD: target to be determined in 2014
Indicator 7.2: Transition rate to secondary education for children, CwD and Roma children
Baseline: BiH: 96.9%; Roma: 71%; CwD: NA (study to be conducted in 2014)
Target: BIH: 100%; Roma: 90% (2019); CwD: target to be determined in 2014
Indicator 7.3: Number of primary and secondary schools where each identified child with disability learns according to an individualized
program/curriculum tailored to his/her needs and abilities
Baseline: N/A
Target: At least 30% of schools in BiH (2019)
Outcome 8: By 2019, enrolment in preschool education for all children, including Roma children and children with disabilities, is increased
Indicator 8.1: Per cent of children enrolled in preschool
Baseline: BIH: 13% (12.2% male, 14% female); Roma: 1.5% (1.4% male, 1.6% female); CwD: N/A (study to be conducted in 2014)
Target: BiH: 30%; Roma: 10%; CwD: 2% (2019)
Outcome 9: By 2019, targeted legislation, policies, budget allocations and inclusive social protection systems are strengthened to proactively protect
vulnerable children
Indicator 9.1: Monitoring systems for social protection that produce desegregated data to address bottlenecks and barriers for the most vulnerable children
and families
Baseline: Not in place (2013)
Target: Joint social report developed countrywide annually
Indicator 9.2: Social assistance for children and families in need harmonized in FBiH (yes/no)
Baseline: Not harmonized (2013)
Target: Harmonized by 2019
Indicator 9.3: Coordination mechanisms for social protection systems established countrywide
Baseline: Not in place (2013)
Target: In place by 2019
Outcome 10: By 2019, child protection systems are strengthened to prevent and respond to cases of violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect of children,
including institutionalization
Indicator 10.1: Percentage of municipalities implementing Guidelines on Response System in cases of Violence against Children

13/18

Baseline: 7%
Target: 40% (2019)
Indicator 10.2: Prevalence of children in institutions, foster care and adoption
Baseline: 2,607 institutionalized; 712 in foster care; 67 adopted (2012, TransMonEE)
Target: 40% decrease in number of children in residential care (2019)
Outcome 11: By 2019, provision of targeted health and public health policies and services, including management of major health risks, and promotion of
targeted health seeking behaviours, is enhanced
Indicator 11.1: Per cent of children, particularly Roma, fully immunized at 18-29 months
Baseline: BiH: 68%; Roma: 4% (2011/2012)
Target: BiH: 10 percentage point increase; Roma: 20 percentage point increase (2019)
Indicator 11.2: Number of families with young children receiving young child well-being services including home visits
Baseline: 2,500 children
Target: 35,000 children (2019)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcomes: 1, 3, 4, 5, 7

UNICEF country
programme
outcomes

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

By 2019, relevant

UNDAF indicators: 1.1, 9.1, CRC Committee BiH Council for Children

14/18

Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme outputs

Major partners,
Indicative resources by
partnership frameworks country programme
outcome (millions of
US$)
BiH Ministry of Civil

RR

OR

Total

government
institutions are
strengthened to
monitor child
rights, reduce
poverty and provide
inclusive access to
social protection
services, including
for the most
marginalized
children, especially
Roma children and
girls and boys with
disabilities

9.2, 9.3

and UPR

Indicator: Percentage of
vulnerable children who
have access to enhanced
inclusive services (e.g. daycare centres for children
with disabilities)
Baseline: 23% of
municipalities offer services
Target: 50% of
municipalities offer services

Knowledge,
attitudes,
practices (KAP)
survey results

Indicator: Percentage of
people who are supportive
of inclusion of children with
disabilities.
Baseline: 41% think CwD
should attend special
schools (KAP survey 2013)
Target: Less than 20%

systematically monitoring
child rights and reporting to
relevant international and
national institutions

Affairs, BiH Ministry of
Human Rights and
Refugees, BiH Agency
for Statistics (and entity
statistics), Department
Network of child rights civil for Economic Planning,
society groups strengthened FBiH Ministry of
and able to monitor and
Labour and Social
report on child rights
Policy, FBiH Ministry
violations
of Health, RS Ministry
of Health and Social
Municipal multisectoral SPI Welfare, Brcko District
commissions established and Department for Health
action plans implemented
and Other Services, BiH
with a focus on the most
Ministry of Security, RS
vulnerable children and
Ministry of Interior and
families
Civil Protection; FBiH
Ministry of Interior and
Vulnerable families and
Civil Protection; Federal
children, especially Roma
Institute for Planning,
and girls and boys with
RS Institute for Social
disabilities, empowered to
Protection, RS
claim their rights and
Children’s Fund,
participate in decisioncantons, municipalities,
making processes
civil society groups,
media, European Union
Positive changes seen in
delegation to BiH,
behaviour and attitudes
World Bank, UN
towards children with
country team)
disabilities

$1.1

$5.8

$6.8

Municipalities have
increased capacities to
strengthen resilience of
children, families,
communities and DRR
systems

15/18

By 2019, an
increased number of
boys and girls use a
continuum of child
protection services
aimed at preventing
and adequately
responding to
violence, neglect and
abuse and family
separation, and
equitable access to
justice is
strengthened for all
children

UNDAF indicators: 1.2,
10.1, 10.2
Indicator: Percentage of
children with disabilities in
residential care
Baseline: 68%
Target: 40%

TransMonEE

Increased public awareness
Same as above, plus
on the need for children
police academies
Official
without parental care,
government data particularly children with
disabilities, to be cared for in
a family-based setting

Indicator: Number of
prosecutors’ offices and
municipal courts applying
child-friendly procedures
Baseline: None
Target: 7 prosecutor’s
offices, 5 municipal courts

$1

$6.5

$7.5

$1.2

$9.5

$10.7

Improved enabling
environment through
strengthened cross-sectoral
coordination and capacities
to design, implement and
budget for child-related
policies and laws
Local-level child protection
systems better enabled to
identify, refer and address
cases of violence, abuse and
neglect
Authorities enabled to issue
and adequately implement
alternative and diversion
measures for children in
conflict with the law
Children and their families
have increased awareness of
different modalities to access
the justice system

By 2019, an
UNDAF indicators: 6.1, 7.1, MICS
increased number of 7.2, 7.3, 8.1
girls and boys have
access to and
participate in better
quality and inclusive
education, including
Roma children and

16/18

Expanded availability of
preschool services for all
children, including for Roma
children and boys and girls
with disabilities
Increased awareness of
parents, especially the most

Same as above, plus
BiH Agency for PrePrimary, Primary and
Secondary Education

boys and girls with
disabilities

disadvantaged and excluded,
on the importance of early
learning and inclusive and
intercultural education for all
boys and girls
Enhanced demand through
advocacy for reduced social
services fees, demonstration
of quality service provision,
promotion of outreach and
empowerment of rightsholders, especially the most
vulnerable families
Education institutions have
supported schools in
developing dropout
prevention and response
interventions.
Dialogue and reform
conducted on the quality,
relevance and inclusiveness
of education, with a
particular focus on
assessment of learning
outcomes, performance and
equity gaps in learning.

By 2019, an
UNDAF indicators: 11.1,
increased number of 11.2
young boys and
girls, including hardto-reach children,
Roma children and
children with
disabilities have
access to quality
health services

MICS

Integrated ECD services
mainstreamed and expanded
across the country
Strengthened systems and
capacities for equitable
provision of quality and
innovative ECD/ECI
services especially for the
most vulnerable and

Same as above plus RS
and FBiH Public Health
Institutes, FBiH Agency
for Quality and
Accreditation in Health

$1

$4

$5

17/18

including IECD

excluded children
Increased trust in
immunization among parents
and the public
Families with children,
especially the most
vulnerable, are empowered
to access and use IECD and
ECI services
Increased awareness on
adequate nutrition of girls
and boys among relevant
government and nongovernment partners and
parents

Total resources

$4.3

_______

18/18

$25.8

$30

