\\

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (E/ICEF/2009/P/L.6) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2009 annual session (8-10
June 2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

Basic data

†

(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

0.8
14

Underweight (% moderate and severe, 2005)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1993-2005)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2006)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)
Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

2
3a
92/89 b
100 b
99
95
<0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)
GNI per capita (US$)

5
3 790

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

95 c

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

96 c

† More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
a
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 3 per 100,000 live births. For
more information, see http://www.childinfo.org/areas/maternalmortality/.
b
MICS 2006 data: DPT3 is 78% and measles is 75%.
c
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in its current structure § defined by the
1995 Dayton Peace Agreement, has limited central power, wit h most government
functions delegated to two entities: the Republika Srpska and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Each of these entities has its own governments and civil
structures. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is highly decentralized, with
10 cantonal governments. Brcko District is a third administrative unit, which has
been under international administration. In March 2009, the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina was amended to define Brcko District on the basis of the awards of
the Arbitral Tribunal and to ensure the District effective access to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court. The country as a whole has 14 governance units,
5 levels of administration and more than 150 ministries and governmental agencies.
2.
Worsening global economic conditions compound a growing trade deficit and
declining remittances. Growth is expected to fall from 6.8 per cent in 2007 to 3 to
4.5 per cent in 2009. Government revenues are projected to stagnate or fall.
3.
According to the Common Country Assessment (CCA) and The State of the
World’s Children 2009, the country is on track to meet most Millennium
§

2

Article I, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina: “The Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the official name of which shall henceforth be “Bosnia and Herzegovina,” shall
continue its legal existence under international law as a state, with its internal structure modified
as provided herein and with its present internationally recognized borders. It shall remain a
Member State of the United Nations and may as Bosnia and Herzegovina maintai n or apply for
membership in organizations within the United Nations system and other international
organizations”.

Development Goals except Goals 2 “Achieve universal primary education” and
7 ”Ensure environmental sustainability”, which will require special efforts. The
maternal mortality ratio declined from 31 per 100,000 live births in 2000 to 9 per
100,000 in 2006, and the gender parity index is 1 in primary education and 1.04 in
secondary education. The proportion of children at work declined from 11 per cent
in 2000 to 5 per cent in 2006.
4.
However, there are three key, interlinked challenges to the fulfilment of
children‟s and women‟s rights. The first is poverty. While Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a lower middle-income country and experienced a doubling of per capita gross
domestic product (GDP) from 2000 to 2007, the proportion of the population living
below the poverty line — over 18 per cent — remained unchanged during that
period. Twenty-three per cent of the population lives just above the poverty line.
Fewer than half of the 680,000 people living in poverty receive social benefits.
Families with three or more children are especially vulnerable: two thirds are poor,
and the depth of their poverty is more severe. Unemployment is high, at 31 per ce nt,
and increasing, as reported in February 2009. It disproportionately affects young
people, 62.3 per cent of whom are out of work. Household strategies to cope with
increasing living costs, which include reducing expenditures on food or having
children work instead of attending school, hamper children‟s well-being.
5.
The second challenge is social exclusion. Fifty per cent of the population
experiences some form of social exclusion, discrimination or stigma. Root causes
include structural barriers to inadequate services, limited civil society participation,
discriminatory attitudes within communities and institutionalized political and
administrative fragmentation along ethnic lines. Over 200,000 children live in or are
at risk of poverty and exclusion; the bulk of them are from minority groups such as
the Roma and internally displaced populations. Around 40,000 live in isolation and
deep poverty with little or no access to services. Over 7.4 per cent of their children
(both boys and girls) are moderately stunted, and 2.5 per cent (2.7 per cent girls and
2.3 per cent boys) are severely stunted. Furthermore, 94 per cent of children
(95.3 per cent boys and 92.0 per cent girls) aged 36-59 months do not benefit from
early childhood education. These children risk failing to reach their full potential
and are at greater risk of learning difficulties, violence and social problems.
Refugee, internally displaced and returnee children face numerous challenges,
including low access to education, discrimination and ins ecurity. In 2008, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education described segregation
of children in schools and the phenomenon of „two schools under one roof‟ as an
unacceptable practice, as it allowed the existence of discriminatory edu cation
models.
6.
The third major challenge consists of functional gaps and system weaknesses
in social services delivery. Indicators reveal difficulties in maintaining the gains
achieved. The rate of complete immunization is only 61.2 per cent, and polio
coverage dropped to 79 per cent in 2007. Catch-up immunization campaigns
targeting excluded children revealed that only 26 per cent had been previously
immunized. Iron deficiency anaemia is high among lactating women (48 per cent)
and pregnant women (39 per cent). The pre-school attendance rate is 6.4 per cent.
Social sector budget allocations remain insufficient: only 4 per cent of GDP is
allocated to education; more than 80 per cent is used to fund salaries and
allowances, with little left for curriculum reform or in-service development. While
laws cover a wide range of child protection rights, many are not enforced due to

3

lack of funding; inadequate procedures, standards and referral practices; and lack of
coordination.
7.
The registered juvenile crime rate among children 14 to 17 years old is
estimated at 255 per 100,000 and is on the increase. Addressing this issue requires
dealing with many challenges: The justice system does not comply with
international standards; juvenile offenders are incarcerated with adults; appropriate
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes are lacking; and alternative measures
are enforced only occasionally.
8.
Out of approximately 3,000 children without parental care, around 1,100 are in
residential institutions. Most victims of child trafficking are girls, who are trafficked
for sexual exploitation, forced labour or begging. Domestic and gender-based
violence and violence against children in schools are not unusual; 35.6 per cent of
children experience some psychological or physical punishment. In addition, 10 per
cent of women are married by age 18, and 5.6 per cent of women believe the
husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife. Although the prevalence of
HIV/AIDS is low, this issue needs attention to prevent an increase in infections.
9.
The three principal statistical agencies have limited technical resources. While
donors support statistical systems reform and large-scale data collection exercises,
there is limited capacity to independently collect and analyse quality,
sex-disaggregated data, particularly in relation to social and child protection.
10. The Committee on the Rights of the Child highlighted the need to address
discrimination and segregation in the education system, institutionalization of
children and rights of ethnic minority children. It recommended harmonization of
the juvenile justice system with international standards and prioritization of
budgetary allocations to ensure minimum levels of social and health protection for
all children. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
recommended increased educational opportunities for marginalized women and
girls, particularly those from the Roma minority.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved
11. The principles embodied in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
presented an opportunity for UNICEF to engage in the social reform process. The
country programme contributed to the establishment of norms and standards fo r a
functional social inclusion and protection system; increased public sector
efficiencies through inter-sectoral approaches and coordination mechanisms; and
strengthened capacity of service providers. The programme also enhanced upstream downstream linkages, through work at policy, services and community levels as well
as through modelling community-level, participatory processes.
12. Key results included implementation of the national action plan for elimination
of iodine deficiency disorders, which helped reduce goitre levels from 25 per cent in
2000 to 7.8 per cent in 2006. Household consumption of iodized salt increased from
68 per cent in 2002 to 79 per cent in 2007.

4

13. The law on pre-school education was adopted, requiring one year of pre -school
education, highly significant in a country with 6.4 per cent pre -school enrolment.
Within two years, 4 out of 12 Government Administrative units had enacted laws
and prepared enlargement plans for one year of compulsory pre -school education.
14. All primary schools implemented at least one principle of the child -friendly
schools (CFS) approach. Almost all lower primary school teachers and 60 per cent
of upper primary school teachers developed and are applying skills in child -centred
teaching and learning methods. Fifty per cent of all secondary school teachers were
certified in life skills-based education. A 2008 UNICEF-supported evaluation of the
CFS initiative showed increased gender equity in enrolment, enrolment of children
from minority groups and inclusion of children with special needs in mainstream
classes.
15. The policy framework on reform of the public child care system, developed in
2006, resulted in the closure of one residential institution for children without
parental care. A draft juvenile justice law was revised in line with international
standards. The Juvenile Justice Coordination Body developed five strategic action
plans to implement the 2006 Juvenile Justice Strategy. Joint programming with the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) — involving the health, social protection,
education, law enforcement and judiciary sectors — resulted in application of a
referral mechanism for early identification, recording and coordinated treatment of
children and women victims of violence.
16. Governance at local level was strengthened through municipal management
boards, which implemented action plans enabling local services to better respond to
the needs of vulnerable families. Approximately 10,000 excluded children and their
families had access to child protection services. Local ownership and commitment
were high, leading to increased allocations from municipal budgets to bridge gaps in
services.
17. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Centre developed standard
operating procedures and undertook capacity building and accreditation of mine risk
education organizations. By 2007, landmine and small arms risk education had
reached over 15,000 children. There were no child casualties related to landmines in
2007 or 2008. Out of 154 communities highly affected by landmines, 128 created
mine risk reduction action plans.
18. In order to fill data gaps, the programme strengthened the evidence base for
policy decisions by conducting a Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS),
developing the child rights impact assessment methodology and rolling out DevInfo
at municipal level. Social inclusion was placed on the policy planning and
development agenda. The UNICEF TransMonee database developed the capacity of
statistical agencies at State and entity levels to report on child well-being indicators.
Lessons learned
19. The application of CFS principles in primary schools increased gender parity
and inclusiveness, particularly among minority groups and children with special
educational needs. Children reported positive learning experiences, greater freedom
of expression, higher self-esteem and increased participation. However, gaps were
noted in sustainability, including a lack of government ownership and insufficient
mainstreaming into the education system. This hinders adoption of the methodology

5

by teachers, as well as quality of performance and impact. The 2008 CFS evaluation
confirmed that cultural and ethnic discrimination are built into the education system.
This finding underlines the need to expand the CFS methodology to promote the
principles of social cohesion and cultural tolerance in schools.
20. The 2007 evaluation of the country programme‟s support to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Mine Action Centre found increased institutional capacity. Support to
mine risk education will be phased out over the next cycle to focus on developing
mine risk reduction methods at local level and implementing the national Mine
Action Strategy 2009-2019. The experience gained in risk reduction methods will be
used to improve policy and services related to small arms and light weapons,
promotion of child safety and reduction of violence among children.
21. Decentralization of the health sector resulted in a fragmented and
uncoordinated approach to vaccine procurement and delivery. This led to a decrease
in the percentage of infants and children immunized against diphtheria and measles
and a corresponding increase in new cases, along with stock-outs of vaccines. This
indicates that the health care system lacks the capacity to effecti vely deliver
immunization and other maternal and child health services. Further support will
therefore be provided to strengthen government capacity to ensure equitable access
of all children to safe and continued immunization, with emphasis on vulnerable
children. Interventions will include supplemental vaccinations such as catch -up
immunization provided by mobile teams in hard-to-reach areas.
22. A joint country-led evaluation of child-focused policies in the social protection
sector found that, while fragmentation of policy processes at different administrative
levels is a challenge, the UNICEF-supported interventions — such as reform of the
child protection system at central and local level — created momentum for policy
change. In a multilayered system, it is critical to give more support to ensure
vertical coherence in policy development and implementation. In this regard,
UNICEF support to strengthen feedback about local experiences to central -level
policy makers — through the municipal management boards — was assessed
positively.

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Social policies and child rights
monitoring

1 450

4 770

6 220

Integrated and inclusive systems
for children

1 169

12 400

13 569

Cross-sectoral costs

1 131

976

2 107

3 750

18 146

21 896

Total

6

Preparation process
23. Programme preparation was based on the 2007 Situation Analysis and the 2008
Common Country Assessment (CCA), the 2007 midterm review and the 2010-2014
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The joint strategy
meeting for UNDAF was held in October 2008. In March 2009, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers adopted the CCA and the UNDAF. The
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women were considered, particularly those
on child protection, exclusion, segregation in education and the need to st rengthen
monitoring and reporting. Consultations were held with counterparts, civil society
organizations, donors and experts. Priorities identified by children in participatory
action research groups, schools, communities and municipalities also shaped th e
proposed programme.
Goals, key results and strategies
24. The proposed programme of cooperation is designed to address the three key
development issues challenging fulfilment of child rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: poverty, social exclusion and system weaknesses. The overarching
goal of the country programme is to support the Government ‟s efforts and plans
aimed at strengthening social inclusion and cohesion, with a view to reducing
discrimination and inequities among children and increase the pot ential for
development of their human and social capital.
25. In support of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Social Inclusion Strategy 2008 2013, the country programme will contribute to achievement of the following key
results by the end of 2014: (a) inclusive policies and plans are developed and
implemented, and human, financial and organizational resources are redirected
towards priorities for children, as identified by key stakeholders at State and entity
levels; (b) transition of both girls and boys from primary to secondary education is
increased to 90 per cent in 17 municipalities; (c) the preschool enrolment rate is
increased to 50 per cent from 6.4 per cent in 2008 ; (d) iodine deficiency disorders
are eliminated; (e) 90 per cent of children are fully im munized; (f) the number of
children in formal care is reduced by 30 per cent and the ratio of children in
institutional care to children in alternative family-based or community-based care is
improved from 2/3 to 4/5; and (g) the proportion of juvenile off enders who are
diverted to non-punitive care and prevention services is increased by 20 per cent.
26. The proposed programme builds on the results achieved during the prior cycle
and is centred on sectors of comparative advantage: education, early childhoo d
development (ECD) and child protection. It uses strategies for which UNICEF has
recognized expertise. The programme will support development of policies and
innovative approaches to strengthen systems and improve the provision of services.
Capacity for modelling and scaling-up cost-effective interventions will be
developed. There will be a new focus on communication for development to trigger
positive changes in behaviour and attitudes. Participatory action research at local
levels will be facilitated to enhance the empowerment of children, women and
young people. Existing partnerships will be strengthened and new alliances
developed in order to create programme synergies, leverage additional resources for
children and ensure that human rights and gender concerns are effectively
addressed. Support will be provided to connect implementing bodies with

7

international networks, good practices and sources of technical expertise, and to
convene partners, decision makers and other stakeholders across sectors. Suppo rt in
setting up coordination mechanisms and contingency plans for emergency
preparedness and response will also be provided.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The programme supports the priorities of the Country Development Strateg y
2009-2013, Social Inclusion Strategy 2008-2013 and State Action Plan for Children
2002-2010, and it is aligned with the country‟s priorities for European Union (EU)
accession. The Country Development Strategy covers six goals, including social
inclusion. The Social Inclusion Strategy identifies required actions in areas such as
education, health and the protection of families with children.
28. The proposed programme is closely linked with the UNDAF outcomes of
strengthening (a) transparent and accountable democratic governance that meets the
requirements of the EU accession process; (b) social inclusion, through a
harmonized approach encompassing participatory policy development and
implementation to ensure inclusive and quality basic social protection; and
(c) human security as it pertains to preparedness for natural disasters, outbreaks of
communicable diseases and reduction of the threat from landmines, small arms and
light weapons.
Relationship to international priorities
29. The programme supports the Millennium Declaration, the Millennium
Development Goals and the principles and goals of A World Fit for Children. It
responds to international commitments by Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Declaration of Commitment of the
General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS and the conclusions of the
Ljubljana Regional Consultation for the United Nations Study on Violence against
Children in Europe and Central Asia. The programme also reflects the priorities of
the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan 2006-2013. The emphasis on reducing
disparities and reaching the most marginalized children and women responds to the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Programme components
30. Social policies and child rights monitoring. This programme addresses
institutional capacity gaps for policy design, implementation and planning at various
levels of government. It supports social sector reform and the formulation of
policies and budgets targeting vulnerable and socially excluded children, based on
quantitative and qualitative analysis of disaggregated data and policy reviews across
all social sectors.
31. The programme has four key results to be achieved by end 2014: (a) social
sector ministries, statistical agencies and civil society organizations collect, analyse
and use reliable and sex-disaggregated data on the status of children in order to
develop, with participation of key stakeholders, inclusive and financially sustainable
policies and plans for children; (b) civil society organizations, including children
and young people in 20 sentinel localities, monitor the implementation of child
rights and national development plans; (c) 40 per cent of communities have greater

8

awareness on social inclusion, and mechanisms to support implementation of
inclusive programmes for children are in place; and (d) the Ministry of Civil Affairs,
the National Advisory Board for HIV/AIDS and relevant ministries implement
strategies and policies sensitive to gender and most-at-risk adolescents to prevent
HIV/AIDS and reduce stigma and discrimination.
32. The main programme areas include social and economic policy development,
evidence-based communication for development and partnerships for children ‟s
rights. In the area of social and economic policy, the programme will provide
technical assistance and support to modelling of approaches that would increase the
capacity for effective allocation of sufficient resources for children by the State level Ministry of Civil Affairs, Ministry of Human Rights and Refugees, and
Directorate of Economic Planning; the social sector ministries at entity and cantonal
levels; and the municipal governments. It will provide technical assistance for
developing integrated policies and strategies to address the exclusion and
vulnerability of families and increase their access to basic social services.
33. The programme will support State and entity-level social sector ministries and
statistical agencies by providing technical assistance and resources for the
collection, analysis and use of reliable, sex-disaggregated data on children. It will
employ a mix of communication for development, social mobilization and media
strategies in support of social inclusion. A joint United Nations programme on
economic governance funded by the Millennium Development Goals Achievement
Fund will support citizen participation in municipal governance to secure access to
water; the programme will lead activities to foster inclusive participation in
decisions relating to public utilities and to promotion of accountability and
transparency.
34. Regular resources will be used to provide technical assistance and support
implementation in unfunded areas of strategic importance, such as monitoring of
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and collection of
evidence on child well-being and poverty. Other resources will fund communication
for development, participatory monitoring and decision-making, and capacitybuilding.
35. Integrated and inclusive systems for children. The programme aims to
address wider social issues, such as child poverty, and their impact on access to and
quality of services through the participation of communities, endorsement of policy
frameworks and strengthening of systems in line with international standards. It
focuses on equitable access to quality education, ECD and maternal and child health
and social and child protection services, particularly for vulnerable and excluded
children and families.
36. Under this programme, the key expected results are: (a) 100 per cent of
primary school children from 20 per cent of municipalities benefit from
standardized child-centred teaching and learning approaches; (b) all children in
15 selected municipalities benefit from quality, integrated ECD services, including
health, education, nutrition and child protection; (c) by the end of 2014, 90 per cent
of children are fully immunized, increasing from 61.2 per cent in 2007; (d) 25,000
children and their families have access to decentralized and alternative child
protection services in 25 municipalities; and (e) a system of juvenile justice is
established in line with international standards.

9

37. Using the CFS approach as a framework, the education component supports
education ministries, municipalities and civil society organizations to develop and
implement policies and strategies to raise the quality of basic education through
institutional capacity building, child-centred learning and teaching methods, and
standards for school readiness. In 20 per cent of municipalities, education policies,
curricula and community programmes will be implemented to increase inclusiveness
and improve inter-cultural understanding. Seventeen municipalities will use
innovative, community-based systems to track non-enrolment and early school
leaving and enhance transition to secondary and tertiary education. Two joint United
Nations programmes funded by the Millennium Developme nt Goal Achievement
Fund will be supported: The culture and development joint programme, in
collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, will seek to revive
cultural heritage, creating the basis for inter-ethnic dialogue, conflict resolution and
social inclusion. The joint programme on youth employment and migration will
address the causes and consequences of youth unemployment and migration.
38. The ECD and maternal and child health programme supports health, education
and social protection ministries, municipalities, civil society organizations and the
private sector to implement inclusive policies and strategies to improve the quality
of early childhood and child health services through capacity building of service
providers. The Ministries of Health will coordinate the development and
implementation of inter-sectoral nutrition, integrated early childhood development
and reproductive health policies and strategies to improve women‟s and children‟s
health and mainstream them into social sector reforms. Adolescents, youth, women,
non-governmental organization (NGO) staff and Government representatives from
15 municipalities will have increased knowledge on prevention of HIV/AIDS and
related issues, including reduction of stigma and discrimination.
39. The social and child protection programme focuses on strengthening
protection systems through policy development and improving decentralized
services, with emphasis on social protection. Interventions will seek to protect
children and women from violence and exploitation, maintain children with their
families, promote alternatives to institutionalization and ensure that detention is
only a last resort. Children and their families will have access to services through
the establishment of child protection systems in 25 municipalities, with functioning
referral and response mechanisms in place. The national juvenile justice strategy
will be implemented and services provided for children in contact with the law, in
line with international standards. Relevant ministries and government institutions
will develop and implement strategies related to child safety, including the reduction
of injuries and risks posed by landmines, small arms and light weapons.
40. Programme partners will include the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Ministry of
Human Rights and Refugees, Ministry of Security, Ministry of Justice and
Directorate of Economic Planning; entity and cantonal ministries of education ,
social welfare, justice and civil defence and public health institutes; Brcko District
departments of education, health and social affairs; agencies for pre -primary,
primary and secondary education, and pedagogical institutes; subnational mine
action bodies; civil society and non-governmental organizations; and the private
sector. Regional and bilateral partnerships include the European Commission (EC),
Council of Europe, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
and the Government of Norway.

10

41. The regular resources will be used to provide technical assistance and support
implementation in unfunded areas of strategic importance, such as ECD, and
focused activities needed in outreach to especially excluded groups, such as the
Roma. The other resources will fund system reform, modelling and innovations.
42. The cross-sectoral costs will cover salaries and costs for travel of crosssectoral staff, security and training, and some operational costs, including those of
the Banja Luka sub-office.
Major partnerships
43. UNICEF is working with concerned ministries in the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including with the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (entity
level), Republika Srpska (entity level), cantonal ministries in the Federatio n of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Government of the District of Brcko. There is also
close collaboration with civil society organizations, including the NGOs Genesis,
Viktorija, Independent Bureau for Humanitarian Issues, Step by Step, Civitas,
Zdravo da ste, Nasa djeca, Budimo akivni, Medica, Duga, the International Baby
Food Action Network, Foundation for Creative Development, Buducnost Modrica
and Hope and Homes for Children.
44. UNICEF is partnering with the EC, the United Kingdom Department for
International Development (DFID) and the Government of Norway to strengthen
social protection and inclusion systems for children. UNICEF will complement
ongoing work by DFID and the World Bank to improve social information systems.
Partnership with OSCE will continue to strengthen juvenile justice systems.
UNICEF will partner with UNDP on child safety issues and UNFPA on
gender-based violence and violence against children. UNICEF will complement
ongoing work on health sector reforms led by the World Bank and wi ll complement
a large-scale project financed by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria by focusing on most-at-risk adolescents and other vulnerable groups. A
comprehensive approach to reducing segregation and discrimination in the
education system will be implemented both inside and outside schools in
collaboration with OSCE, Open Society Institute and Save the Children Norway.
UNICEF will convene key partners, decision-makers and actors for children and
will act as a knowledge broker, connecting partners with international networks,
good practices and sources of technical expertise in order to strengthen national
capacity for knowledge management.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The programme will work with the Directorate of Economic Planning of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the State and entity statistical agencies to adopt a more
systemic approach to defining roles and responsibilities for monitoring and
evaluation at all government levels, with an aim to strengthen accountability for
improved social services. UNICEF will continue to play a strong role in United
Nations inter-agency work and joint programmes, particularly in implementing
activities supported by the Millennium Development Goal Achievement Fund.
46. Monitoring the status of children and families, especially the socially
excluded, is a key component of the country programme. UNICEF will partner with
the Directorate of Economic Planning to address gaps in the country ‟s social
information system. MICS 4 (2011), TransMONEE and DevInfo will yield

11

qualitative and quantitative data for measuring the impact of country programme
interventions on children. The key indicators to measure progress results will relate
to poverty, child poverty, level of social exclusion, vaccination and educational
attainment, as follows: full immunization rates; maternal mortality ratio; child
poverty rate; rate of transition to secondary education; cash transfers/allowances to
children; proportion of children learning in child -friendly and inclusive
environments; proportion of children in ECD centres; number of children in formal
care; and rate of juvenile imprisonment.
47. Child rights impact assessments and research on child poverty and exclusion
will be supported. In conjunction with the midterm review, planned for 2012, a
country-led evaluation of the impact and effectiveness of support to social
protection and inclusion will be completed. The integrated monitoring and
evaluation plan will include mid-year and annual reviews with partners, informed by
field visits, evaluations and surveys. The situation analysis of children will be
updated and a new CCA prepared. Joint UNDAF reviews will be held annually.
48. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will review and monitor the programme,
which will be managed in collaboration with government at State and entity levels.
Programme components will be managed by the relevant sectoral ministries:
Ministry of Civil Affairs, Ministry of Human Rights and Refugees, and Directorate
of Economic Planning, as well as entity ministries for education, health and social
protection.

12

