Botswana
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Botswana
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.2) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 annual session (8-10 June
2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

†

Basic data
(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.8

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

40 a

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2000)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2005) b
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2005)

13
380 c
83/85

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2004)

75

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

96

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old)
GNI per capita (US$)

47
23.9
...
5 840

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

97

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

90

†

a

b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at
http://www.unicef.org.
The Government of Botswana estimates 76 per 1,000 live births (Botswana Demographic
Survey, 2006).
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
http://www.childinfo.org/areas/maternalmortality/.
The Central Statistics Brief 2008 estimates maternal mortality at 190 per 100,000 live births
in 2004.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The situation of children and women in Botswana continues to improve, with
the greatest challenge to progress being the negative impact of t he AIDS epidemic.
Botswana is a middle-income country where access to all basic social services is
above or close to ninety per cent: primary school attendance, access to health
facilities, immunization coverage and access to safe water. The Millennium
Development Goal on gender parity in education has already been achieved. Justice,
transport, telecommunications, insurance, banking, security and commercial systems
are all fully functional. And yet infant and child mortality increased sharply between
1988 and 2006. 1
2.
The Government has a rigorous planning process, and routinely generates data
through the national census, demographic surveys, the Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey, among others. The development of the 10th National Development Plan
(NDP10) highlighted two main challenges: overdependence of the economy on
diamonds, requiring economic diversification, and high HIV prevalence, requiring
stronger prevention and impact mitigation. While there are relatively high levels of
per capita financial resources and a positive enabling environment in place for
economic and social development, other areas of concern include the potential
__________________
1

2

The 2006 Botswana Demographic Survey estimates the infant mortality rate at 51 pe r 1,000 live
births (2005), compared to 37 per 1,000 live births reported in 1988.

impact of climate change, high rate of youth unemployment, gender inequality,
increasing crime levels, violence against women, alcohol abuse and, to a lesser
extent, child labour.
3.
In spite of high economic growth since independence, some 30 per cent of the
population is poor by standard development benchmarks, and income inequality is
high by international standards, both between urban and rural areas, as well as
within these groups. Census and household survey data reveal that 58 per cent of
households are headed by a single parent, absentee fathers are common, and some
two per cent of households are headed by children.
4.
As a result of sustained investment in the health sector, 95 per cent of the
population lives within eight kilometres of the nearest health facility. While overall
access rates to services are high, the more remote rural areas are relatively
underserved and have poorer outcomes for children.
5.
Good rates of access to services are not always matched by quality of service,
with limited positive effect on family and community practices to support child
survival, development, protection and participation. For example, while antenatal
care attendance rates are very high, neonatal mortality is estimated to be
comparatively high, at 34 per 1,000 live births (2004), highlighting concerns about
newborn care, support and infant feeding practices. The potential of hea lth
education assistants in programme communication is not fully utilized.
6.
The major underlying cause of child morbidity and mortality is HIV infection.
It is estimated that 58 per cent of deaths among children under five are attributable
to HIV or AIDS. Surveillance data show that HIV prevalence among women
attending antenatal care is 32 per cent (2006). However, aggressive programming
has reduced mother-to-child transmission (of HIV) from 40 per cent in 1998 to 3 per
cent in 2007. The introduction of dried blood spot testing in 2006 has improved the
testing of HIV exposed infants. Paediatric antiretroviral treatment is available
nationwide, with high-level specialty care available in the two largest cities. Access
to paediatric antiretroviral therapy and quality of service provision need to be
further scaled up to reduce HIV-related under-five mortality. Data on tuberculosis
among children are not available.
7.
Other major causes of child morbidity and mortality include acute respiratory
infections and diarrhoea. Despite this high morbidity rate (38 per cent of children
had acute respiratory infections in the two weeks preceding the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey 2000), only 14 per cent of these children received care from an
appropriate provider. Malnutrition is the second major underlying factor
contributing to child mortality. Among children under five, the stunting rate was
about 26 per cent in 1993, and had not changed significantly in 2000 when it was 23
per cent. Overall, 82 per cent of the urban population and 26 per cent of the rural
population have access to improved sanitation facilities. Limited access to sanitation
and poor hygiene practices were identified as contributing factors in the 2006
diarrhoea outbreak.
8.
Botswana is committed to malaria elimination by 2015. Malaria is endemic in
only five northern districts, which account for over 80 per cent of reported malaria
cases. The 2007 Malaria Indicator Survey revealed that only 12 per cent of children
under five and 9 per cent of pregnant women in endemic districts used insecticidetreated bed nets to protect themselves.

3

9.
Primary prevention is recognised as the greatest priority in the national
response to HIV and AIDS. HIV incidence increases sharply within the 15 -24-yearold age group. Prevalence among 15-19-year old females and males is nine per cent
and three per cent, respectively, and for 20-24-year-olds it is 27 per cent and 10 per
cent, respectively (Botswana AIDS Impact Survey, 2004). Despite various
campaigns, adolescents and young people still lack correct and comprehensive
information, relevant skills and adequate services. An investigation about the
sources of information 2 on HIV and AIDS revealed that the teacher in the
classroom, followed by the radio, television and the newspaper were the main
information sources for adolescents 10-18 years old. There was minimal
communication on HIV or AIDS in the family. Less than 1 per cent of the
adolescents had obtained information from the church. Combined factors, including
multiple concurrent partnerships, age-disparate sex, very limited practice of male
circumcision, and inconsistent condom use among adolescents, constitute an
extremely high risk context, where adolescent females are disproportionately at
higher risk of HIV infection then adolescent males.
10. Some 15 per cent of all children are orphans. Children are disproportionately
found among the poorest households, typically rural ones headed by women.
Despite established safety nets, only 34 per cent of households with orphan s and
vulnerable children receive external support and only 19 per cent of households
below the poverty line receive any government transfers.3
11. The interactions of gender violence, alcohol and the spread of HIV are
assumed to be significant, but there is little research to confirm this to date. Genderbased violence takes many forms, including emotional and physical abuse, rape,
and, more recently passion killings. Due to stigma and the inappropriate manner in
which rape cases are handled by the police, many rapes go unreported or cases that
have been reported are withdrawn. The new Domestic Violence Act (2008)
complements criminal law by providing civil remedies to enable greater protection
under the law for survivors of violence while they await the cr iminal justice system
to take its course.
12. There is limited coordination of services among the security, justice, health
and social welfare sectors to respond to child and women victims of abuse, violence
and exploitation. The social welfare system is also relatively limited in its capacity
to follow up with individuals beyond their initial contact and registration with social
services.
13. There are relatively small numbers of refugees in Botswana. These increased
sharply in 2007-2008 due to an influx from Zimbabwe. Most are accommodated in
the Dukwe refugee camp, where shelter, food, water, health, sanitation and
education services are provided. The capacity of government institutions to prepare
for and respond to emergencies is well established for minor flood and drought
response, but less so for other potential disasters.
14. To inform effective communication strategies, Botswana currently lacks
audience studies. However, a limited (urban and peri-urban adults) study in 2006 4
__________________
2

3
4

4

Rapid Baseline Assessment Survey of HIV and AIDS Prevention: Knowledge and Beliefs among
Adolescents in Botswana (UNICEF, forthcoming in 2009).
Social safety nets in Botswana, Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis (2007) .
Botswana All Media and Products Survey, MTC Marketing and Research Solutions (2006).

showed that Setswana is the language spoken at home for 86 per cent of the
population. According to the survey, only 18 per cent of the respondents had
television sets and 3 per cent had computers, while 95 per cent had a radio. The
study also showed that just over half of the respondents go to church regularly.
Regarding community engagement, there is also a lack of studies.
15. Overall the legal and policy environment for children will be strengthened by
the National Child Rights Bill, which is tabled for parliament in the first session of
2009. The discussion of the bill on radio and television and in the print media
provided many opportunities to raise public awareness about children’s rights. The
bill will address one of the main recommendations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child: to domesticate the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Other major recommendations of the committee include more systematic data
collection, greater dissemination of the Convention, more active promotion of birth
registration, greater attention to HIV prevention, improved access to the highest
attainable standards of health care and protection for the most disadvantaged
children.
16. Botswana’s initial report on the implementation of the Convention, which was
submitted in 2001, was discussed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child on
16 September 2004. Both the combined second and third Convention reports
(overdue since April 2007) and the initial and second reports, due in 2003 and 2006,
respectively, are to be submitted in 2009.
17. Further improvements in the situation of children and women are integral to
NDP10, but in the medium term they may be overshadowed by the impact of the
global financial crisis. While the impact on government resource allocations for key
social services for children and families may be cushioned by drawing upon
government reserves, there may be some contraction as government spending is
restricted as a share of gross domestic product. More directly, however, families are
likely to be affected by the sharp rise in unemployment and reduced incomes.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation, 2008-2009
Key results achieved
18. The 2008-2009 programme of cooperation bridged the transition from the
2003-2007 programme to a joint United Nations programme for 2010-2014. To date,
the main achievements of the 2008-2009 cooperation include the development and
endorsement of the strategic plan on Accelerated Child Survival and Development
(ACSD) to help structure health initiatives and resource allocations at national and
district levels from 2009 onwards. The preparation of the Children’s Bill, for
enactment in 2009, will put in place significant measures to protect children’s rights.
The programme also advocated successfully for a higher and broader profile for
social protection, and the recognition by the Government of the need for a
comprehensive social development policy. All were achieved through the provision
of specific technical assistance to the Ministries of Health and Loc al Government.
Lessons learned
19. The 2008-2009 programme identified the need for a strategic shift from
service delivery, such as direct support to orphans, to more “upstream” work to

5

build the capacity of the Government to develop child rights -based policies, norms
and standards. This is a more effective use of the limited resources available to the
country programme, and the policy-level work has been explicitly requested and
welcomed by the Government. The 2010-2104 programme of cooperation will
consolidate this shift, and is consistent with the broad “upstream” approach adopted
by the UNDAF 2010-2016. The preparation and discussion of the Children’s Bill
provided an opportunity for public education and debate on children’s rights.
Similar opportunities to raise awareness of children’s rights should be seized in the
future.
20. The development of the national strategic plan on ACSD in 2008 demonstrated
the potential for data and advocacy to inform government priorities. The continuing
work on costing to develop an investment case is expected to further inform
resource allocations by the Government. Thus, the programme of cooperation will
need to emphasize the role of evidence-based decision-making and the importance
of integrating monitoring, evaluation and accountability throughout the programme
cycle.
21. The high levels of coverage across a range of social services for children,
combined with the high rates of morbidity and mortality, suggest that infrastructure
and services are not the constraint; rather, attention should focus on behaviour and
the unequal access (by area or socio-economic group) to quality services. Thus,
communication for development, grounded in research and the specific situation in
of Botswana, must play a prominent role in closing the gap between services and
behaviour. Some groups still do not access social services, which points to the need
to improve targeting and partnerships with civil society and religious groups in this
regard.
22. Primary prevention of HIV is recognized as the single most important priority
in order to make a difference in one of the eight “hyper-endemic” countries of the
world. The country programme will need to reflect a deeper understanding
(including research initiated in 2008-2009) of the decision-making processes that
adolescents follow in a variety of contexts that put them at risk of infection, or risk
transmission to others.

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Young child survival and
development

1 175

3 075

4 250

Child and adolescent protection and
participation

2 127

6 675

8 802

Advocacy and planning

248

4 500

4 748

Cross-sectoral costs

200

750

950

3 750

15 000

18 750

Total

6

Preparation process
23. In 2007, the joint Common Country Assessment (CCA) by the Government
and the United Nations highlighted the main development challenges and
established consensus on which areas the Government would draw upon United
Nations support. The CCA focused on economic growth, access to social services,
governance and the environment.
24. The UNDAF 2010-2016 is based on further analysis of the CCA findings, the
emerging priorities of the NDP10 (2010/2011-2015/2016), Vision 2016 and the
progress required to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The NDP10 will
be finalized and formally endorsed by the Government in early 2010.
25. The CCA and UNDAF processes were both consultative and inclusive.
Participants in the process included resident and non-resident United Nations
agencies; government ministries and departments; representatives of civil society
organizations and the private sector; and other development partners. The process
was overseen by a Reference Group co-chaired by the Ministry of Finance and
Development Planning and the United Nations Resident Coordinator. The analysis
and drafting was undertaken by five working groups, each co -chaired by the
Government and United Nations technical managers.
26. UNICEF support in 2010-2014 will be an integral part of the Programme
Operational Plan of the Government and United Nations, which will be completed
in 2009, complementing the programmes and activities of other United Nations
partners within the UNDAF.
27. Given the substantive consultation on the UNDAF and the Key Results for
2010-2016, it was agreed between the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning and UNICEF that smaller bilateral discussions, followed by a formal
meeting of the Joint Planning and Coordinating Comm ittee of the Government and
UNICEF, would suffice.
28. Initial screening identified no proposed programming areas requiring
environmental impact assessments.
Goals, key results and strategies
29. The overall goal of the country programme is to contribute to the achievement
of NDP10 in areas directly and indirectly affecting the survival, development,
protection and participation of children and families.
30. The programme design is sensitive to the high HIV-endemic status of
Botswana, and includes strengthening the quality of prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (of HIV) (PMTCT) and paediatric care and support, much greater
emphasis on primary prevention and the development of greater quality and
coverage of support and care for children affected b y HIV. It also recognizes that
there are other drivers of neonatal, infant and under-five mortality and therefore
supports the quality and access to high-impact interventions to reverse these. In
addition, the situation reveals a range of child protection issues, which need to be
inclusive of (but not limited to) support to orphans and integrated within a broader
social protection and social development agenda.
31. The key results for the UNICEF programme of cooperation are to contribute to
(a) reduction of under-five mortality; (b) reduction of incidence of HIV among

7

young children; (c) reduction of adolescent girls’ risk and vulnerability to HIV; and
(d) reduction and mitigation of violence, abuse, neglect, discrimination and
exploitation of children.
32. The overall strategy of the country programme will focus on policies, norms
and standards and on strengthening national-level systems and capacities to ensure
continued coverage, strengthened quality and equity of access to social services for
children and families. Direct support for service delivery will continue to be very
limited. Advocacy will focus attention on children’s issues, building on the platform
of the National Child Rights Bill (expected to be enacted in 2009).
33. Within a rights-based approach to programming, there will be increased
strategic emphasis on evidence-based decision-making, the normative role of
UNICEF and the United Nations, human-resource capacity-building, monitoring and
evaluation, and more meaningful participation of childr en, youth, women, men,
families and communities in reaching these results. Opportunities to use information
and communication technologies in programme delivery will be exploited.
Capacities for emergency preparedness and response will be developed in
coordination with United Nations partners, including the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
34. The above key results define the areas where UNICEF support will contribute
to the achievements of the Programme Operational Plan of the Government and
United Nations. The Government-United Nations Programme Operational Plan will
articulate the agency-specific or joint results contributing to the five UNDAF
outcomes, in the areas of (a) governance and human rights promotion; (b) poverty
reduction and economic diversification; (c) health and HIV and AIDS;
(d) environment and climate change; and (e) child, youth and women empowerment.
UNICEF support will reflect areas of clear mandate, such as child protection, as
well as special contributions to cross-cutting areas, including communication for
development, communications, human rights promotion, justice, and emergency
preparedness and response.
35. The UNDAF 2010-2016 harnesses the resources of all United Nations
agencies, organizations and programmes (resident and non-resident) as the basis for
a single programme of support for the realization of the goals of NDP10, Vision
2016 and the Millennium Development Goals and the Millennium D eclaration.
Other specific national frameworks are implicitly included, such as the National
Strategic Plan on Accelerated Child Survival and Development, the National
Strategic Framework on HIV and AIDS, and the National HIV Prevention
Operational Plan.
Relationship to international priorities
36. The country programme will be aligned, through the UNDAF, to support the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, particularly with regard to
child survival and poverty and combating HIV, malaria and other diseases, and with
the Millennium Declaration, particularly Section VI. The programme also directly
aligns with the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, addressing HIV and AIDS and
Children (focus area 3) as the overarching concern, supported by young child

8

survival and development (focus area 1), child protection (focus area 4) and policy,
advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights (focus area 5).
Programme components
37. Young child survival and development. Support to PMTCT and paediatric
care will strengthen the existing PMTCT and paediatric treatment interventions,
aiming to achieve universal access to and participation in PMTCT and universal
treatment and care for HIV-positive children. This will include infant feeding
practices for HIV exposed children and improved treatment for HIV-exposed
children through increased adherence to cotrimoxazole prophylaxis.
38. Support to high-impact interventions within the National Strategic Plan on
ACSD will increase access, quality and coverage of servi ces that address the other
major causes of child morbidity and mortality, and provide the child with the best
start in life. These will include assistance to the national authorities in the ACSD
roll-out, especially in the technical areas of management of acute malnutrition,
micronutrients, malaria elimination, information on safe water, sanitation and
hygiene and the introduction of new vaccines as well as integrated early childhood
development. Support will also be provided to strengthen the supply chain
management by the Ministry of Health.
39. To strengthen the link between services and positive behaviour, the capacity of
the Government to promote positive family and community practices will be
strengthened in areas such as care-seeking behaviour, antenatal, neonatal and
postnatal care follow-through, and infant and young child feeding practices.
Child and adolescent protection and participation
40. Support to efforts in reducing the incidence of HIV among children and
adolescents will focus on the groups most at risk, in particular girls and young
mothers (with a link to PMTCT). Reducing adolescent girls’ risk and vulnerability
to HIV will be achieved by prioritizing support around the achievement of the
following outputs: (a) ensuring adolescents have comprehensive knowledge and
skills for HIV prevention (especially among young women and girls); and
(b) strengthening evidence-informed behavioural and social change interventions
aimed at to reducing multiple concurrent partners and age -disparate sex among
adolescent girls (and their partners). Communication for development approaches
will be critical to better understand the drivers of adolescent behaviour and thereby
increase individual knowledge and skills and promote positive social norms.
41. Protection, care and support for vulnerable children will focus on systems
development and strengthening, and will prioritize the following outputs:
(a) strengthened justice and social systems, including the follow-up on
implementation of the Child Rights Act, the subsequent realignment of legislation,
as well as promotion of the ratification of the optional protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and strengthening reporting, monitoring and
implementation of the Convention and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights; (b) effective social protection mechanisms established, based on
vulnerability assessments, research and analysis; (d) strengthened service providers’
capacity to implement child protection measures (preventative, responsive a nd
monitoring); and (d) universal birth registration for children under five. The

9

programme will promote respect for the views of children and their participation in
all matters affecting them in accordance with their age and maturity.
42. In collaboration with key United Nations partners, UNICEF assistance will
apply a mix of upstream and midstream operational and system development
support to national partners — on evidence-informed HIV prevention programming
with and for adolescent girls and on strengthening child protection systems. Since
attendance rates at the primary school level are over 80 per cent, the potential of the
education sector will be harnessed for HIV prevention, therefore UNICEF will work
with the Ministry of Education and other partners to ensure that policies and
programmes (such as lifeskills and school health) effectively address HIV
prevention. Recognizing that there are geographic areas within Botswana with
substantially higher HIV prevalence and disparities in access to social prot ection,
the country programme will strategically utilize human and financial resources to
focus on a select number of learning districts to generate evidence -based guidelines
and standards around effective programming for children and adolescents, linking
interventions targeting schools, health facilities and communities. The programme
will also strengthen social protection systems and specifically promote models for
integrated response services for children and women who have survived abuse and
violence and to increase access to child-friendly justice procedures.
Advocacy and planning
43. Support to research, planning and evaluation will develop and implement a
strategic monitoring, evaluation and research plan to generate data and information
in support of effective advocacy and inform programme design and accountability,
as well as to strengthen national monitoring and evaluation systems and to generate
lessons learned. In order to influence key decisions, the programme will promote the
use of the most up-to-date data, analysis and information on the situation of children
and women. Advocacy on social policy issues — budget allocations, budget
utilization, progress on implementation of NDP10, progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals, social safety nets, follow-up on the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and other international human rights instruments — will be undertaken
accordingly. Support to social policy development has been requested from UNICEF
and will contribute to an overall enabling framework of social services and child
rights realization. The component will provide technical support for policy dialogue
and resource leveraging to sustain and improve coverage, quality and equity of
access to social services for children and their families.
44. In partnership with the young child survival and development programme, the
programme will also support costing of interventions, making the case for
investments in health (public and private), strengthening household level safety
nets, to ensure access to good quality health services.
Cross-sectoral costs
45. Cross-sectoral costs will support the operating costs for the provision of
UNICEF assistance.
Major partnerships
46. The principal counterparts will be the Ministry of Finance a nd Development
Planning, the Office of the President, line ministries and other legal authorities in

10

Botswana. Within the context of joint annual work plans, specific activities for
technical assistance and capacity development will be defined.
47. Explicit efforts will be made to involve men and women, girls and boys, and to
work more closely with and in support of civil society organizations, professional
associations, the media, parliamentarians, traditional chiefs, political parties,
religious organizations, academia and the private sector. Existing partnerships will
be adjusted to reflect this shift in approach and emphasis on behaviour change and
effective utilization of the widely available social services. Given the lack of donor
agencies present in the country, UNICEF will also engage large-scale funding
mechanisms, such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the
United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and the Clinton
Foundation, to leverage resources for women and children and also influence policy
through sub-regional bodies such as the Southern Africa Development Community.
48. Drawing upon the coordination mechanisms of the One United Nations
Programme, partnerships with other United Nations agencies will be c learly defined
within each of the UNDAF thematic areas. UNICEF is designated to chair the
Theme Group on Governance and Human Rights Promotion and will co -chair the
theme groups on health and HIV and AIDS; children, youth and women
empowerment; and poverty reduction and economic diversification. UNICEF will be
a member of the fifth theme group, on environment and climate change. UNICEF
will also be a member of the United Nations Advocacy Committee and the Joint
United Nations Team on AIDS.
49. In young child survival and development, UNICEF will continue to work
closely with the World Health Organization and the United Nations Population
Fund. The United Nations Population Fund will lead on sexual and reproductive
health interventions which will address maternal mortality.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
50. The Government-UNICEF Programme Operational Plan will be complemented
by a common budgetary framework, and will guide the joint preparation of annual
work plans for each of the five UNDAF outcome areas.
51. For planning, implementation, review and monitoring purposes, a single
programme coordination structure will be agreed under the overall leadership of the
United Nations Resident Coordinator and the Ministry of Finance and Developmen t
Planning, with membership from key implementing agencies and stakeholders from
the Government, umbrella organizations for civil society organizations and
development partners. Within this framework, specific working groups will manage
each of the UNDAF themes.
52. Based on the UNDAF, a common monitoring and evaluation framework will
be developed as part of the Programme Operational Plan. Measuring results will be
done jointly through existing government mechanisms and institutions. A midterm
review of the United Nations Programme Operational Plan will be conducted in
2012, which will inform the priorities and strategies for the remainder of the
UNDAF period.
53. Specific support towards enhanced monitoring, evaluation and statistical
capacity will not only be geared towards monitoring progress towards NDP10 and

11

the Millennium Development Goals, but will also contribute to the UNDAF
monitoring and evaluation requirements.

12

