Brazil
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Brazil
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.40) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

60.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

21

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)

2

(% urban/rural)

2/2
75 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported 2007)

95/95 b

Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female, 2008)

88 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

97

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

80

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

..

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2007-2008)

4c

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2008)

91

GNI per capita (US$)
One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

99

†

a

b
c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Fifty-eight deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate. The UN Interagency Group
(WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank), which produces internationally comparable
sets of maternal mortality data, adjusted for under-reporting and misclassification of
maternal deaths, including estimates for countries with no data. Comparable time series on
maternal mortality ratios for the years 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2008 are available at
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.
Indicates data differ from standard definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women

1

1.
Brazil is the world’s fifth largest country, by population and geographical area,
with the eighth wealthiest economy. 2 The 190 million people living in the country’s
5,565 municipalities include 60 million children and adolescents, of whom 51 per
cent are boys and 49 per cent are girls. The population is 84 per cent urban and
16 per cent rural. Afro-Brazilians constitute 51 per cent of the population. 3 Brazil’s
215 indigenous groups, speaking 180 languages, 4 live mostly in the semi-arid and
Amazon areas of the North and North-East regions. Available estimates for
__________________
1

2

3
4

2

Sources in this section, unless otherwise stated: paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 8: National Bureau of
Geography and Statistics (IBGE), National Household Survey (PNAD) 2004 to 2009;
paragraphs 5,6,7,9: Ministry of Health (MoH), Deaths Notification System (SIM), Births
Notification System (SINASC), Interagency Network of Health Information and National
Programme on STD/AIDS (PN-DST-AIDS), 2008.
World Bank, World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY.GNP.ATLS.CD?order=wbapi_data_value_2009+wbapi_data_value+wbapi_data_value last&sort=desc.
IBGE/PNAD 2009, page 97, table 1.2.
National Indian Fundation, 2010.

indigenous and quilombola 5 communities suggest around 2 million people live in
over 2,450 communities. Thirty per cent of Brazilians (57 million people) live in
nine metropolitan areas, including the mega-cities of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo,
where 3 million live in extreme poverty. Part of this population suffers from
exclusion, particularly those living in disadvantaged neighbourhoods. About
35 million people (13 million children) live in the semi-arid area and 24 million
people (9 million children) in the Amazon. 6
2.
Millennium Development Goal 1 (eradicate extreme poverty and hunger) has
been achieved based on successful government policies, such as the Bolsa Familia
conditional cash transfer programme, which took 13 million people out of extreme
poverty. Yet important challenges remain in reducing geographical, social,
demographic and ethnic disparities. According to the national d efinition of income
poverty (families having a net monthly per capita income up to half of the minimum
wage), 7 29 per cent of the population (55 million people) live in poor families and
16.2 million live in extreme poverty. 8 Children and adolescents and Afro-Brazilians
of all ages are the hardest hit by poverty. Eradication of extreme poverty is the main
development objective of the new Government of Brazil. 9
3.
Although 98 per cent of all children aged 7 to 14 attend school, 535,000
remain out of school (57 per cent boys and 43 per cent girls). Of these, 330,000
(62 per cent) are Afro-Brazilians. 10 Adolescents (ages 15-17) especially lack
realization of their right to education: 1.5 million are not enrolled, and each year
400,000 secondary school students drop out before the end of the term. Children
with disabilities are particularly excluded from education. In 2007, 463,000 children
with disabilities were attending primary school, and only 16,000 were enrolled in
secondary schools.
4.
Brazil is on track to meet Millennium Development Goal 4 (reduce child
mortality) before 2015. Between 1990 and 2008, the under-5 mortality rate dropped
57.5 per cent (from 53.7 deaths per 1,000 live births to 22.8 per 1,000). The infant
mortality rate fell 59.7 per cent (from 47.1 deaths per 1,000 live births to 19 per
1,000). The South-Eastern and Southern regions achieved the national goal in 2008,
while the North and North-East have not. The infant mortality rate among
indigenous populations (41.9 per 1,000 live births) is more than twice the latest
official national rate. Disparities also affect infant and neonatal mortality among
indigenous populations: out of 19 deaths of children under 1 year (per 1,000 live
__________________
5

6

7
8

9

10

Afro-Brazilian groups living in impoverished rural communities in territories linked to
descendents of escaped slaves. Data from Ministry of Social Development (MDS) 200 7,
“Relatório GT População Quilombola”.
Source: IBGE, population estimates 2009 published in Datasus website: www2.datasus.gov.br/
DATASUS/index.php?area=0206.
Source: IBGE, Social Indicators Synthesis, 2010, table 4.3.
The Ministry of Social Development, together with IBGE, has recently redefined the
methodology for extreme poverty as population living in households with net monthly per -capita
income up to BRL 70.00 ($43) plus population with no declared income matching specific
criteria. Source: MDS, May 2011.
President Dilma Rousseff (the first woman to be president of Brazil), was inaugurated on
1 January 2011. A new plan, “Brasil Sem Miséria”, aimed at lifting 16.2 million people out of
extreme poverty, was announced on 2 June 2011.
Afro-Brazilians aged 7 to 14 have a 30 per cent higher risk of not attending school than white
children.

3

births), 13 occur before 1 month of age. In the Northern regi on of Brazil, 41 per cent
of all indigenous children under 5 years suffer from stunting. 11
5.
Despite progress in maternal health, reaching the Goal 5 target of a three quarters reduction in maternal mortality remains unlikely, alth ough the maternal
mortality ratio has dropped by almost half since 1990, from 140 to 75 deaths per
100,000 live births. While fertility rates have decreased steadily for all age groups,
the number of pregnancies among girls aged 10 to 14 has slightly increased in recent
years. 12 The number of infants born to mothers under 15 went up from 6.9 per 1,000
live births in 1994 to 9.7 in 2007. 13 Birth registration has increased 14 but remains
low in the North and North-East regions, especially in the Amazon and semi-arid
areas and among indigenous populations.
6.
According to estimates, 15 approximately 630,000 Brazilians are living with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Of the 593,000 cases of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) reported from 1980 to 2010, 32,000 were
among children under 19 years old. Initiatives to fight vertical transmission have
been successful, and the incidence among children under 5 decreased 41.7 per cent
from 1997 to 2007. Between 1985 and 2007, there was a strong shift in the
male/female ratio of AIDS cases: from 15/1 to 1.5/1. Among adolescents aged 13 to
19, this ratio has already inverted: there are 10 cases among girls for every 8 cases
among boys.
7.
Violence 16 against children and adolescents affects girls the most (62 per cent
of reported victims); occurs mostly at home (60 per cent of reported cases); and is
common in public institutions such as detention centres and schools (20 per cent of
reported cases). Girls account for 75 per cent of victims of sexual exploitation,
abuse and pornography, particularly Afro-Brazilian girls, and 7 of the 10 states with
the highest number of reported cases are in the North and North -East.
8.
Brazil currently has 21 million adolescents aged 12 to 17, its largest adolescent
population ever. Adolescents are particularly vulnerable to school dropout,
becoming parents at a very early age, being exploited in the job market and falling
victim to homicide. Of all exogenous factors, homicide is the number one cause of
death among adolescents, responsible for more than twice a s many deaths as the
number two cause, transportation accidents. In 2008, over 7,000 adolescents aged
15 to 19 were murdered. 17 Seventy per cent were Afro-Brazilian and 93 per cent
were boys. The number of girls who are victims of homicide has also increase d.
9.
Brazil remains vulnerable to natural disasters. The number of emergencies
almost tripled from 2007 to 2010, mainly in the form of floods, landslides and
droughts in all regions. There has been a major increase in emergencies affecting
__________________
11
12
13

14

15
16

17

4

The National Survey in Health and Nutrition of the Indigenous Populations, 2009.
Ministry of Health/SINASC 2008.
The Amazon and the semi-arid areas had higher rates (15.9 and 12.0, respectively). Rates refer
to North and North-East regions as proxies of Amazon and semi-arid. Source: MoH/SINASC.
Birth under-registration rate fell from 30.3 per cent (1995) to 8.9 per cent (2008) bu t remains
high in the North (15 per cent) and North-East (20 per cent) regions (IBGE).
Epidemiological Bulletin 2010, STDs/AIDS, /Ministry of Health.
Data from Ministry of Justice, System for Childhood and Adolescence, SIPIA and “Disque
denúncia”, 2010.
Ministry of Health, SIM.

urban areas. Floods in the Southern region in January 2011 resulted in over 800
deaths.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
10. The establishment of the Pact for Children, a strategy to secure political wi ll
among state governments and civil society, served to set targets for intersectoral
policy action for the most disadvantaged children and adolescents, as recommended
in the 2004 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 18
UNICEF worked continuously with more than 80 per cent of municipal
governments in the semi-arid area in a process of advocacy, technical cooperation,
capacity development and knowledge management. Through the UNICEF Municipal
Seal of Approval (a programme through which awards or other forms of recognition
are given to municipalities for their efforts in improving the living standards of
children and adolescents), subnational policy implementation intensified and social
indicators of participating municipalities improved at higher rates compared to
national averages. Infant mortality fell by approximately three times the average
decrease in the national rate.
11. The number of underweight children under 2 years old decreased by 85 per
cent between 2000 and 2009, and the number of women who had the recommended
six antenatal care visits increased 5 per cent from 2006 to 2008. Cooperation with
the Ministry of Health resulted in the training of 117,000 community health agents
(50.6 per cent of the total) in 19 Brazilian states, including 21,180 childcare and
preschool teachers. The Millennium Development Goal Joint Programme — which
involves UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme, International
Labour Organization, Pan American Health Organization/World Health
Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
Brazilian Government — focused on food security and nutrition of indigenous
women and children in Mato Grosso do Sul and Amazonas states. The result was
strengthened child-health family skills in 10 indigenous communities with a total
child population of 8,141 children.
12. A 2009 constitutional amendment expanded mandatory and free schooling for
children aged 4 to 17. This major national achievement, supported by UNICEF,
strengthened education policies for adolescents. The Municipal Seal mobilization in
the semi-arid area improved school attendance rates among adolescents aged 15 to
17. Attendance rates improved 17.8 per cent in states participating in the Pact for
Children and 8.5 per cent in other states between 2006 and 2009. The Literacy at the
Right Age initiative piloted in Ceará state, which lowered child illiteracy rates, was
replicated in the states of Piauí, Rio Grande do Norte and Bahia.
13. The Young People and Adolescents Living with HIV Network was established
and recognized as a participant in major national policy structures. 19 The Laços
__________________
18

19

Concluding Observations and Recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child were issued in October 2004 (CRC/C/15/Add.241, 1 October 2004) following the first
report Brazil on implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The Network secured a seat on the National AIDS Commission, Federal Working Group for
Health Prevention in Schools, UNAIDS thematic groups and National Youth Council.

5

Sul-Sul Horizontal Cooperation Initiative for Brazilian cooperation in HIV/AIDS
prevention has prolonged hundreds of lives and enabled national AIDS programmes
to strengthen prevention and treatment coverage in all participating countries. 20
UNICEF has contributed to the Brazilian response to HIV/AIDS by providing
technical expertise in procurement of supplies, including antiretrovir al drugs,
generating savings for the Government of $30 million since 2007. 21
14. UNICEF technical cooperation contributed to the development of the Ten -Year
(2011-2021) National Plan for the Promotion of Children’s Rights (known as the
Ten-Year NPA) and national public policies for child labour eradication and
adolescent worker protection, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child. Also developed were the National Plan of Action on Family and
Community-based Care, a new socio-educational system for adolescents in conflict
with the law and the National Programme to Reduce Lethal Violence against
Children and Adolescents. The new National Plan for Racial Equality in Education,
supported by UNICEF and partners, was implemented in all states and
municipalities.
15. Technical support was also provided for identification of indicators to monitor
the new plan on racial equality in education in municipalities of the semi -arid area;
the inclusion of quilombola children up to age 6 in social assistance programmes
(especially the Bolsa Família programme); expansion of municipal health and social
assistance services for indigenous families; and changes in child protection councils
to address indigenous children’s issues.
Lessons learned
16. The importance of engaging duty-bearers at all levels (federal, state and
municipal) proved fundamental to influencing and designing public policies for
children that achieved significant results in addressing disparities and subnational
inequity, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
17. The 2009 midterm review recommended a continuous focus on reaching the
most disadvantaged populations and addressing subnational disparities, identifying
the strong UNICEF presence at national and subnational levels as a key comparative
advantage. The ongoing engagement of UNICEF at the local level contributed to
upstream dialogue on specific policies; capacity development of local public
managers; communication for development to change social norms and behav iours;
technical cooperation to improve local information systems; and brokering of
partnerships.
18. Strategic partnerships with key actors of society achieved stronger civic
engagement with child rights and commitment to influencing and supporting
positive change for the most disadvantaged children and adolescents. The strategic
__________________
20

21

6

The countries participating in the Laços Sul-Sul Horizontal Cooperation Initiative for Brazilian
cooperation in HIV/AIDS include the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Cape Verde, Guinea -Bissau,
Nicaragua, Paraguay, Sao Tome and Principe, and Timor-Leste.
These savings have been partially invested by the Government of Brazil in the development of
national production of antiretroviral medications, based on the country ’s strategic vision of
joining the limited pool of producers of generic drugs. The supportive procurement role of
UNICEF has helped the Government’s Laços Sul-Sul Horizontal Cooperation Initiative (a
portion of nationally produced antiretroviral medications have been donated to other countries
through South-South cooperation).

partnerships developed with the private sector (beyond fundraising) underscored
their role and participation as stakeholders in the social development arena.
19. Advocacy for safe water and gender-sensitive sanitation facilities in every
school in the semi-arid area involved with the Pact for Children resulted in policy
measures to secure public funding for schools lacking water and sanitation facilities,
leading to sustainable results.
20. Adolescence was recognized in the public policy agenda as an age group
requiring specific sectoral policies and legislation. 22 The new Government,
recognizing that investing in adolescents is required to break entrenched cycles of
poverty and inequity, strengthen democracy and increase social participation, has
announced a series of policy-related priorities targeting youth. These include
generating more educational and professional opportunities; reducing health risks
related to early pregnancies and substance abuse; and increasing access to basic
services and cash transfer programmes for families with adolescents.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Survive and develop

--

15 000

15 000

Learn

--

18 000

18 000

Protect and be protected from HIV/AIDS

--

8 000

8 000

1 350

18 000

19 350

--

7 000

7 000

Advocate, generate knowledge, communicate and
unite for children’s rights

1 030

13 250

14 280

Cross-sectoral costs

1 370

11 000

12 370

3 750

90 250

94 000

Grow up free from violence
Be an adolescent

Total

Preparation process
21. The Brazilian Agency for Cooperation (within the Ministry of External
Relations) coordinated the country programme exercise, which involved
consultations with all relevant stakeholders in the Brazilian government. The 2008
Strategic Moment of Reflection and the 2009 midterm review and gender review
and equity analysis were critical in defining the programme’s framework, which is
designed to address the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
These processes also took into account strategic priorities enuncia ted by the new
Government, 23 the Common Country Assessment and the United Nations
__________________
22

23

These policies include: expansion of cash transfer programmes to fa milies with adolescents aged
15 to 17; adjustments in national juvenile justice standards expanding the use of open custody
measures by municipalizing their application; and making secondary education obligatory.
The pluri-annual plan for 2012-2015 is currently under preparation.

7

Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2012-2015, as well as consultations
with a variety of partners nationwide.
Programme and component results and strategies
22. The overall goal of the country programme is to support Brazil in meeting, by
2016, its commitment to ensure more equitable realization of the right of each
Brazilian boy, girl and adolescent to survive and develop, to learn, to be protected
from HIV/AIDS, to grow up free from violence, to be an adolescent and to be an
absolute priority in public policies.
23. The programme will contribute to universalizing children’s rights and
achieving the Millennium Development Goals with equity in support of the national
priority to eradicate poverty in Brazil and globally. The focus will be on the most
disadvantaged children and adolescents, in terms of where they live (the Amazon
and semi-arid areas and the poorest urban centres); ethnic origin (Afro -Brazilians
and children from indigenous groups); personal condition (having disabilities, living
with HIV or being victims of prejudice or discriminatory practices); gender; and
vulnerability to emergencies.
24. UNICEF will continue to support multi-level, upstream, evidence-based
advocacy to influence equity-driven and gender-sensitive policies, laws, budgets and
results-based planning processes at federal, state and municipal levels. UNICEF will
also provide advice to the Government of Brazil in the implementation of global
normative standards concerning children and adolescents. Emphasis will be placed
on developing capacities at national and subnational levels; strengthening local
capacities to monitor and evaluate public policies; identifying data gaps; combating
inequalities; and mainstreaming gender in national policies. Good practices that
address disparities and inequities and ensure children ’s rights will be identified,
evaluated and disseminated, building on the country’s global partnerships and
horizontal collaboration agenda.
25. Strategic alliances for children will be strengthened, including with national
and local government, civil society, young people’s organizations and other United
Nations agencies. This will take place through institutional and community capa city
development; promotion of intersectoral cooperation; advocacy and leveraging of
resources at federal and state levels; and fundraising with the private sector to
ensure adequate levels of other resources for programme implementation.
26. The programme will support gender equality by advocating for disaggregated
data and gender analysis and promoting women’s and girls’ political voices and
strategic gender roles. UNICEF will play its normative role in supporting the
Government to develop guidelines that give priority to children in disaster risk
reduction, prevention and emergency response and to work with schools to reduce
their environmental vulnerabilities.
27. Policy advice and technical cooperation will be provided to ensure that public
policies support implementation of specific strategies to reduce racial and ethnic
inequities, such as through developing knowledge about institutional racism.
Communication for development will be supported to mainstream discussions on
racial and gender equality among families, adolescents and communities, and to
promote social and behavioural change.

8

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
28. The programme will contribute to the Ten-Year NPA and the Government
pluri-annual plan (2012-2015), which focuses on (a) inclusive development and
eradication of extreme poverty; (b) growth in employment and income generation
that is environmentally sustainable and reduces inequalities; (c) strengthening of
democracy with the promotion and expansion of social dialogue, ethics,
transparency and citizenship; (d) better quality of life with improved public services
and infrastructure for all; (e) equality in rights and opportunities; and (f) national
sovereignty and an increased role for Brazil internationally.
29. The programme is synchronized with the UNDAF to ensure greater United
Nations coherence. Programme components contribute directly to all four UNDAF
focus areas: Millennium Development Goals for all; green economy and decent
work; public security and citizenship; and South-South cooperation.
Relationship to international priorities
30. The country programme is based on the principles of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples and the Hyogo Framework for Action. The programme will
support Brazil to advance beyond the Millennium Development Goals and the
Millennium Declaration and the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child, focusing attention on the inclusion of all boys and girls. Furthermore,
the programme responds to the focus areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic
plan as well as the country’s Bicentennial Educational Goals for 2021.
Programme components
31. UNICEF will work with a wide range of government and civil society partners
in all six programme components to ensure children’s rights.
32. Survive and develop. The main goals are to support government attainment of
Millennium Development Goal targets for maternal and child survival and to
strengthen capacities of duty-bearers and rights-holders in the Amazon and
semi-arid areas and disadvantaged neighbourhoods of large urban centres. The focus
will be on women and girls, Afro-Brazilians and indigenous people. Expected
results are: (a) reduced rates of maternal mortality (30 per cent in five years) and
neonatal mortality (5 per cent yearly); (b) reduction of pregnancy among children
and adolescents (20 per cent in five years); (c) promotion of food and nutrition
security to reduce chronic malnutrition, especially among indigenous children of the
Amazon area, from 41 per cent in 2009 to 35 per cent in 2016; and
(d) implementation of the National Policy for Early Childhood Development.
33. The UNICEF contribution will be in building the capacities of health workers
to improve key family and community practices regarding child and maternal health,
complemented by policy inputs, partnerships, communication for development,
knowledge sharing, and monitoring and support of national indicator systems.
Surveys to monitor the nutritional status of children will be supported to inform and
strengthen public policy response.

9

34. Learn. This component will support government and civil society efforts to
realize the right to universal quality schooling for all children aged 4 to 17. Efforts
will be directed at monitoring and analysing school dropout and academic failure
rates to inform inclusive policy responses. The objective is to enable access,
permanence and learning, targeting the geographic areas where the most
disadvantaged children live (Amazon, semi-arid and urban). Nationwide capacity
development programmes for teachers, managers and local educational actors will
be supported. In collaboration with the Ministry of Education, state and municipal
education departments and social organizations, UNICEF will participate in
monitoring the 2011-2020 National Education Plan and Bicentennial Educational
Goals for 2021 and in generating and disseminating knowledge and strengthening
partnerships to guarantee universal access and quality education for children and
adolescents, including children with disabilities.
35. Protect and be protected from HIV/AIDS. In support of the country’s
response to HIV/AIDS, the programme will focus on geographic disparities and
inequalities related to gender, race, ethnicity and other forms of discrimination.
Expected results are: (a) reduction of vertical transmission rates in the North and
North-East regions; (b) reduction in the number of new AIDS cases among young
people, especially girls and Afro-Brazilians; (c) inclusion of the rights and demands
of HIV-positive children, adolescents and young people in health, education and
social assistance policies; and (d) increased participation of youth in discussions
about policies on AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and their
prevention in schools.
36. Strategies will include: (a) capacity development to support implementation of
the strategy to prevent vertical transmission of HIV in the Amazon and semi-arid
areas; (b) strengthening and institutionalizing the national policy on
STDs/HIV/AIDS prevention in schools; (c) promoting the development of HIV
prevention policies focused on disadvantaged groups; (d) strengthening the HIV+
Youth Network at national, regional and local levels; and (e) providing procurement
services and supporting South-South cooperation, including strengthening youth
participation and prevention projects in schools in Laços Sul -Sul countries.
37. Grow up free from violence. This component will support Brazil in aligning
the legal standards, mission and goals of public institutions with the principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and CEDAW and the Ten-Year NPA to
improve the protection of girls and boys against all forms of violence, abuse and
discrimination. Intersectoral action at all levels of government will be strengthene d
to increase birth registration rates; prevent physical, sexual and other forms of
violence against adolescent boys and girls; and strengthen the Child Rights
Guarantee System. Advocacy and communication will support positive social
change.
38. Expected results are: (a) the Child Rights Guarantee System is strengthened at
municipal level in the Amazon and semi-arid areas and urban centres; and
(b) violence within the family, at home and in communities, institutions and
educational settings is prevented and reduced, with a focus on indigenous and
Afro-Brazilian children and adolescents living in disadvantaged neighbourhoods of
large urban centres.
39. Strategies will include: (a) technical support for implementation of the Ten Year NPA; (b) strategic development of child protection indicators at municipal

10

level; (c) strengthening of operational mechanisms for the protection and promotion
of children’s rights, including during emergencies; (c) facilitating coordination and
synergy among key actors; (d) strengthening protocols that address child and
adolescent victims and those in contact with the justice system by promoting open
custody and socio-educational measures at municipal level; and (e) communication
for development to promote social change and build strategic partnerships with civil
society, including the private sector.
40. Be an adolescent. This component will support the development of a
multisectoral public policy focusing on strengthening social inclusion and
participation of adolescents to reduce inequalities that prevent their positive
development in society. The main strategies will emphasize: (a) advocacy and
capacity development to support the rights of adolescent boys and girls to exercise
citizenship, through the development of a legal fra mework to institutionalize their
right to take part in decision-making processes; (b) providing a life-skills training
curriculum focusing on citizenship, using communication and digital devices as well
as non-violent conflict resolution methods; and (c) producing gender- and racesensitive knowledge and communication for development to change social norms,
attitudes and practices towards adolescents, to build positive perceptions of them as
agents of social change.
41. Expected results include: (a) adoption of a multi-sectoral policy on adolescents
aimed at upholding their rights, including to information and skills; (b) access to
services, such as education, health, recreation and justice; (c) a safe and supportive
environment; and (d) opportunities to participate and have their voices heard.
Special attention will be given to integrated protective, adolescent -focused
initiatives aimed at reducing lethal violence and health risks related to pregnancy
and substance abuse.
42. Advocate, generate knowledge, communicate and unite for children’s
rights: This component will support the government’s national plan to advance the
well-being and rights of boys, girls and women. It will focus on reducing poverty
and making inequity more visible to ensure that, by 201 6, specific social policies
prioritize the most disadvantaged children and adolescents, including in public
budgets. The component will also support the country’s global cooperation agenda.
43. Expected results are: (a) improved knowledge and data on driv ers of inequity;
(b) increased behaviour and social change; (c) improved reporting on the situation
of the most disadvantaged children; (d) strengthened institutional capacities of
municipal actors; (e) further development of strategic partnerships with a wide
spectrum of actors; and (f) a prominent emphasis on universalizing child rights in
the country’s global horizontal and humanitarian cooperation agenda.
44. Key strategies will include: (a) systematizing and disseminating good practices
and lessons learned, within Brazil and internationally; (b) evaluating public policies
and their capacity to reach the most disadvantaged; (c) promoting behaviour and
social change through evidence-based advocacy for inclusive pro-child policies that
are sensitive to gender and race; (d) communication to improve quality reporting on
the situation of the most disadvantaged children; and (e) strategic partnerships with
the Government, civil society and the private sector based on the principles of
horizontality, mutual trust, responsibility, common values and knowledge-sharing.

11

45. The Municipal Seal methodology will continue to focus on developing the
capacities of local actors, based on human rights programming and results
management. It will also address analysis of public budgeting to assess the impact
of social investments, including cash transfer programmes, in reducing the
inequities affecting the most disadvantaged Brazilian children and adolescents. In
addition, promotion of the right to practice safe and inclusive sport, including for
children with disabilities, will be used as a catalyst for achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, as well as to address inequities and promote social change. The
objective is to ensure that upcoming sports events in Brazil (the Wo rld Cup in 2014
and the Olympic/Paralympic Games in 2016) leave a positive social legacy for
children and adolescents.
46. Cross-sectoral costs encompass cross-cutting and operational functions to
ensure effective and efficient implementation of the countr y programme, including
communication, planning, monitoring and evaluation, and programme management.
This component also includes costs for mobilization of resources.
Major partnerships
47. UNICEF will work in partnership with all levels of government, other United
Nations agencies, academic institutions, civil society, the media, the private sector
and the international community including bilateral partners as relevant, to realize
the rights of all children. Positive business practices and child -focused corporate
social responsibility will be promoted with the private sector and the media.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. The Brazilian Agency for Cooperation will be the main coordinating body for
programme implementation and monitoring, to be carried out with the involvement
of relevant public institutions. Annual and five-year plans will guide integrated
efforts in monitoring and evaluation. A midterm review will be conducted in 2014,
and progress will be assessed during annual review meetings. Annual equity-based
situation analyses on children, adolescents and women will be developed
thematically. National and subnational monitoring systems, supported by DevInfo,
will provide information on progress and results achieved.
49. Efforts to obtain data and evidence will be mobilized at all levels of
government, through studies, surveys and evaluations. Central to UNICEF
cooperation will be evaluation of equity-driven government social programmes;
analysis of data and knowledge in partnership with major government institutions;
and implementation of triangular horizontal cooperation with the Brazilian
Government, and with the involvement of the Brazilian Agency for Cooperation.

12

