Bulgaria
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Bulgaria
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.4) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

Basic data†
(2010, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

1.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

13

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2009)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2008)

..
..
13 a
98/99
94

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

100

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

0.1

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female)

..

Birth registration (%, under 5 years)

..

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

..
6 240

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

94

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

97

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
The reported estimate is 5 deaths per 100,000 live births (2009), as presented in the
TransMONEE report, 2011. The estimate of 13 deaths per 100,000 live births was developed
by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the
World Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/
maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Bulgaria as a member state of the European Union (EU) since 2007 strives to
converge towards EU standards in socio-economic development and cohesion.
Bulgaria is bound by and contributes to the formulation of European strategic policy
priorities and legislative frameworks. The National Reform Programme for 2011 2015 aims at sustainable growth and social inclusion and thus closely reflects the
“Europe 2020” Strategy.
2.
The Government of Bulgaria has made important steps towards reforming and
modernizing child care and child protection systems in line with the 2008
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and EU standards and
adopted an ambitious National Reform Programme for 2011 -2015 aiming at
sustainable growth and social inclusion.
3.
The country was hit hard by the global and regional economic downturn, and
as a result exercises stricter fiscal discipline to preserve its macro -economic
stability. Although the economy is showing some positive signs, the gross national

2

income per capita dropped 1 from $6,603 in 2008 to $6,240 in 2010. Unemployment
rates have almost doubled, to 10.2 per cent, 2 with the 2011 youth unemployment
rate estimated at 21.8 per cent. Gender disparities are present in the labour market,
as women are paid on average 20 per cent less than men. To support necessary
public sector reforms, the Government has access to EU Structural Funds, but still
struggles to make full use of these resources.
4.
Austerity measures have stalled the Government’s goal of increasing the
standard of living to 60 per cent of EU average by 2020 and have slowed down the
progressive realization of children’s rights. The social protection system is under
strain, with budgetary allocations for social welfare shrinking from BGN 891 to
BGN 691 million between 2009 and 2010, 3 while at the same time the budget for
child allowances decreased by 24 per cent.
5.
It is to the Government’s credit that while funds for means -tested social
assistance were cut by more than half, funding for child protection services and for
integration of children with disabilities were largely preserved. 4 Through concerted
efforts and careful prioritization, the country was successful in advancing child
rights regarding protection. This was seen is the reduction of the number of children
in residential care institutions, which dropped by over 40 per cent in terms of the
rate per 100,000 child population between 2001 and 2010. During the last five
years, the number of foster families increased tenfold, 5 and in 2010 for the first time
more children at risk were placed in alternative family care than in residential care,
thanks to strengthened preventive child protection services and the development of
innovative alternative types of care. Strong government commitment to system
change, backed up by UNICEF advice and EU Structural Funds, played an
important role in reorienting policies and resource allocations. However, the risk of
institutionalization remains high for most disadvantaged and minori ty groups and
children from poor families. Children with disabilities still represent 46 per cent of
the total number of children in residential care.
6.
There are still significant disparities among various groups in the population of
7.3 million, the majority of which comprises people of Bulgarian ethnicity and two
dominant ethnic minority groups: 6 Turks (8.8 per cent) and Roma (4.9 per cent).
Nearly half of the child population (44.6 per cent) 7 is at risk of poverty and social
exclusion. While the overall poverty rate is 20.7 per cent, poverty affects two thirds
(65 per cent) 8 of families with three and more children, most of them Roma. Poor
families live in remote rural areas and in suburbs of larger towns, often in
inadequate housing. In settlements with Roma population, 47 per cent 9 of dwellings
do not have appropriate sanitary conditions, compared with the national average of
7 per cent.
__________________
1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9

www.databank.worldbank.org.
National Institute of Statistics.
Public Finance Management Survey, Oxford Policy Management, 2009/2010.
Public Finance Management Survey.
State Agency for Child Protection, www.sacp.government.bg.
2011 census, www.nsi.bg. However, the EC estimates that Roma consist of 10 per cent of the
population in Bulgaria, according to the EU Framework for Roma Strategies.
Eurostat 2011.
UNICEF Situation Analysis 2011.
2011 census, www.nsi.bg.

3

7.
An increasing number of children whose parents do not have health insurance
cannot access health services, and 12 per cent of children 0-3 years of age are not
assigned to a doctor, 10 although the right to free access to health is guaranteed under
the law. Overall, the infant mortality rate is low at 9.4 deaths per 1,000 live births,
but in some areas of the country it is three times higher, up to 28.4 per 1,000. 11 The
situation is worse in Roma settlements, where access to health services is difficult
and parents and caregivers generally have received a low-level education and have
inadequate parenting skills. In these settlements nutrition is also of poor quality and
does not meet requirements for the age of the child. Moreover, sanitary conditions
are below standard. The percentage of children with low birthweight has increased,
and stood at 8.7 per cent in 2010. 12 HIV/AIDS prevalence remains low, although a
20 per cent annual growth of newly registered cases has been recorded.
8.
Although there is a strong antidiscrimination policy in place, children’s right
to education is also marked by ethnic disparities. According to the 2011 census,
23.2 per cent of Roma children do not attend school, compared with 11.9 per cent
among the Turkish minority and 5.6 per cent among ethnic Bulgarians. Roma girls
are more likely than boys to drop out from school earlier. Overall, prescho ol
enrolment rates at age 5 have reached 80 per cent, but primary school enrolment
rates (grades 1-4) have declined, while the rate for higher levels (grades 5 -8) was
only 80.6 per cent in the 2010/2011 school year. 13 The inclusion of children with
disabilities into mainstream education has been promoted, and the Government is
committed to pursuing further steps to improve access and outcomes. The overall
quality of education needs special attention, as more than 40 per cent of Bulgarian
ninth-graders were found to be functionally illiterate 14 in the latest survey of the
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). 15 Similarly, one in every
five people 20-29 years old is functionally illiterate. 16
9.
Bulgaria has demonstrated that change within public administration systems is
possible in a relatively short period of time: the recent experience in closing
residential care institutions showed that capacity gaps related to budgeting and
resourcing the provision of services for excluded children can be ove rcome. This
success has indeed yielded important lessons that can be disseminated within the
region and globally.
10. Further progress in the realization of child rights is within reach, and now
entails tackling the root causes of child rights violations r elated to structural
poverty, prevailing attitudes and social norms. To this end, the 2008 Concluding
Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child point to the need for
systematic gathering and analysing of disaggregated data. This can be accom plished
by establishing an independent body for child rights monitoring and strengthening
the voice of the Ombudsman’s Office to complement the State Agency for Child
Protection, within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The Agency is the body
__________________
10
11
12
13
14

Defined in PISA as being below level 2 in reading, which is considered by OECD as the baseline
proficiency level: “the student is not able to locate one or more pieces of information in a text or
recognize the main idea in a text or make low level inferences”.

15

http://stats.oecd.org/PISA2009Profiles/#.
According to the 2011 census.

16

4

National Health Insurance Fund www.nhif.bg.
UNICEF Situation Analysis 2011.
National Institute of Statistics, 2011.
National Institute of Statistics, 2011.

primarily responsible for child rights monitoring in the country. Civil society
organizations (CSOs), too, need to continue to be empowered to assess and promote
child rights beyond specific areas already receiving attention, such as child abuse
and children deprived of liberty. There is a need to ensure that those initiatives are
systematic and cover a wide spectrum of child rights concerns. The recently
established National Network for Children, bringing together over 100 CSOs, is
emerging as an important actor for the development of child-friendly policies.
11. Regarding emergencies, Bulgaria has moderate risk of major floods and
earthquakes.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2010-2012
Key results achieved
12. The 2010-2012 country partnership between UNICEF and the Government of
Bulgaria pursued the goal of social inclusion of the most vulnerable children and
families and aimed at mobilizing broad-based national support and resources for the
progressive realization of children’s rights.
13. The key priority of the country partnership over this period was to accompany
the Government’s comprehensive child-care system reform, which began in 2000.
The partnership resulted in the above-mentioned reduction of 40 per cent in the rate
of children in residential-care institutions. UNICEF contributed through giving
policy advice and suggesting innovations for building the institutional capacity to
manage the new system. This was accompanied by strong public awareness
campaigns implemented at national and local levels, including media campaigns,
which helped to create a conducive environment for deinstitutionalization.
Relatively modest investment in modelling innovative services benefiting children
in institutions set out alternative standards for child care and family support. This
informed government policies, including the “Vision for Deinstitutionalization”
national strategy and plan of action, adopted in 2011, which covers the period up to
2025, and enabled the leveraging of significant financial support from EU Structural
Funds. There is a planned $147 million of EU Structural Funds earmarked under the
national strategy and plan of action for the implementation of five major
programmes for deinstitutionalization and for strengthening the capacity of the
social care system.
14. The country partnership reinforced the capacity of regional and local
governments for planning and delivering social services for vulnerable groups,
which contributed to improved efficiency of local governments in assessing the
needs of the most vulnerable groups and better allocation of resources. The new
planning methodology scaled up to the 28 regions of Bulgaria in 2010 after it had
been applied in three regions in 2009, continues to be implemented with the s upport
of EU funds, and was subsequently reflected in the Social Assistance Act. In
addition, alliances with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society
enabled greater civil society engagement in promoting child rights in Bulgaria .
15. UNICEF was successful in strengthening the support of Bulgaria for children’s
issues globally. According to a 2009 Gallup International survey, UNICEF is
recognized as a credible organization working both at national and global levels,

5

and is therefore well positioned to nurture support for disadvantaged children,
within Bulgaria and internationally. This was demonstrated in 2010 when the public
donated over $1 million for the children of Haiti, and almost the same amount for
the development of family-based care for young children in Bulgaria.
Lessons learned
16. A key lesson drawn by stakeholders during the midterm review of the country
partnership is that, even with the commitment of the Government, and well developed strategies and policies in place along with access to EU funds and good
practices, the initiative to promote positive systemic change for children is still
fragile. Continued support and advice are needed to address the remaining
bottlenecks. These include the low capacity of duty-bearers for preventive
interventions at the local level, especially within the most marginalized
communities; the weak linkages between social services and cash assistance;
ineffective monitoring mechanisms; and the lingering resistance to change. The next
five years will be critical to consolidate the gains brought about by social sector
reforms and sustaining results for children. The aim will be to change the system
from being one that reacts to child rights violations towards one that is built upon
risk prevention and family support. Changing social norms and attitudes, as well as
the behaviours of claim-holders will be vital to increasing the demand for and
uptake of new services. It will be equally important to increase available funds for
social programmes and maximizing their benefit for children in Bulgaria.
17. An assessment of budgetary allocations for social services, which was
conducted as part of the 2009-2010 Public Finance Management Analysis, and the
analysis of budgets of residential care institutions for children aged 0-3, carried out
jointly by the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Finance and UNICEF, both
suggest the need to improve the equity impact in financing public services. While
funds are available, additional mechanisms are required to enable more flexible
re-direction of funds to the new, child-friendly services for excluded children. The
process of developing child-friendly and equity-enhancing budgeting procedures
needs to be continued and expanded.
18. The midterm review of the country partnership highlighted that a key strength
of UNICEF in Bulgaria is its integrated approach combining policy advocacy,
communication for development and private sector fundraising. These are proving
successful in fostering overall social change for children and in creating public
awareness of inequities and a sense of responsibility for addressing them. National
media campaigns raising public awareness on selected child right issues kick -started
the debate around the need for new policies and behaviour change in the public
social sector system. Close collaboration with one of the key media networks in the
country has become a strong channel enabling UNICEF to foster national dialogue
in support of public sector reforms. The resource mobilization component, wit h its
emphasis on advocacy, was found to reinforce the active participation and
commitment of large numbers of people. There is an expectation by partners that
UNICEF will continue with this mix of roles, but will also add a component of
facilitating exchange of knowledge across countries, regionally and globally. This is
considered to be the unique contribution of UNICEF, especially to a new, forward looking mode of engagement with Bulgaria.

6

Framework of cooperation, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Area of cooperation

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Equity and social inclusion for children

1 500

7 000

8 500

Alliances and national capacity for child rights
monitoring

1 500

5 000

6 500

750

500

1 250

3 750

12 500

16 250

Cross-sectoral
Total

Preparation process
19. This proposed five-year country partnership document was developed in close
collaboration with government agencies, NGOs and the United Nations entities
present in Bulgaria. It is based on data and information on disadvantaged children
gathered through the 2011 Situation Analysis of children and women. The areas of
cooperation were selected following the recommendations of the midterm review of
the 2010-2012 country partnership, held in October 2011. The review outlined a
shared vision of UNICEF role in the country, well into the current decade rooted in
the aspiration of Bulgaria to contribute to regional and global knowledge on
inclusion and equity and the unique position of UNICEF as repository of
international best practices regarding the rights of children to development and
protection.
Country partnership components, results and strategies
20. The main strategy of this country partnership is to enhance the national
capacity for social inclusion and reduction of child poverty, furthering the
realization of the rights of all children to equal access to education, health and
protection and to strengthen child rights monitoring systems. The human rights based approach will be the underpinning normative principle, which will be applied
in all areas of work. Its main focus will be on the most vulnerable children and
families, and it is expected that innovations promoted by this five -year collaboration
will help to leverage more EU structural funds and other social funds to directly
benefit the most disadvantaged children, as well as to support periodic reporting on
EU membership processes. The cooperation will strengthen broad -based
partnerships with civil society, the business sector and the media, and foster a
framework of corporate social responsibility to mobilize support and resources for
achieving local, national and global goals for children.
Areas of cooperation
21. Equity and social inclusion for children. In support of government efforts to
build on inclusiveness for Bulgarian society, as described in Europe 2020 strategy of
the EU, this component will contribute to the design of policies and the
implementation of innovative practices focused on the most disadvantage d children:

7

children living in institutions or at risk of being institutionalized; children living in
poverty, especially children of ethnic minority groups; children with disabilities;
children, especially girls, who leave school before completing compuls ory
education; children in conflict with law; and adolescents out of school and out of
work.
22. This component of the Bulgaria-UNICEF country partnership will contribute
to more children from excluded and poor families benefiting from equal access to
education and protection systems. This will be achieved through the following
expected results: (a) an increased number of children in need of protection
benefiting from family-based services, with particular focus on children from poor
families, children with disabilities, and children aged 0 to 3 years old; and a
significantly reduced number of children placed into institutions and the closing of
additional institutions; (b) more young children and their parents, especially in
marginalized Roma communities, who benefit from the application of intersectoral
policies and innovative inclusive services for early childhood development,
including child health for young children and early education; (c) an increased
school enrolment in compulsory education, with a reduced number of adolescents
who drop out of school, especially Roma girls, and increased inclusion in education
for children with disabilities and children from ethnic minority groups; (d) a
reduction of the number of children in conflict with the law depr ived of liberty; and
(e) increased access by adolescents out-of-school and not qualified to find work to
new services for a “second chance at education and development”, a programme —
to be designed with their active participation.
23. The country partnership will seek to achieve social equity by focusing on
children who are currently excluded and have poor access to mainstream services
such as health, education and protection. Approaches will be taken that:
(a) reinforce institutional capacity through modelling innovative practices, including
communication for development approaches to tackle harmful practices and increase
demand for services, (b) demonstrate new services, reaching out to the most
marginalized families and children, and (c) improve regulato ry and budgetary
support for the implementation of existing and new policies and services. The focus
will be on operating at the local levels of governance, through strengthening the
capacity and accountability of regions, municipalities and local service providers to
respond to the needs of children. Efforts will be complemented at the central level
by inter-sectoral coordination to ensure working models are reflected in policies,
regulatory provisions and budget allocations.
24. The partnership will leverage the best expertise available domestically, in
Europe and internationally for the development of universal policies and standards,
and interventions tailored to specific local needs. These will include standards and
interventions for the further advancement of the already well developed Bulgarian
de-institutionalization strategy. This involves in particular the following measures:
making accessible a continuum of preventive and support services for families at
risk; the design and implementation of decentralized strategies for early childhood
development that encourage positive parenting and enhance accountabilities in the
health, protection and education systems for reaching out to the most marginalized
families; active promotion of school enrolment and prevention efforts for children
who drop out of school before completing the compulsory education, and providing
these children with “second chance” opportunities; improved monitoring of the

8

inclusiveness and quality of education; and intersectoral cooperation and new
services for children in conflict with the law.
25. Working “at scale” with local authorities in three regions with larger Roma and
other ethnic minorities, the partnership will develop and test “social technologies”
for delivering effective and culturally sensitive services in the most disadvantaged
communities to promote rights relating to child health, education, development and
protection. These innovative inclusive policies and services have the potential to
become models for other countries. They will constitute a body of work on which to
base horizontal cooperation in the region and contribute to global knowledge on
effective equity-enhancing approaches in providing access to services for excluded
children.
26. Alliances and national capacity for child rights monitoring. This country
partnership component supports and complements ongoing efforts by the
Government to strengthen the country’s capacity for systematic and comprehensive
assessment of the results of its policies and standards, i n terms of equity and social
inclusion. In addition, it will help mobilize public and private sector support and
collaboration in an alliance to foster social equity for children and to promote — in
Bulgaria and internationally — a “post-Millennium Development Goals” agenda
centred on children. It is also expected to generate additional resources for children,
and create a conducive social environment for the country’s broader global role in
support of international initiatives for children. Making maximum use of UNICEF
global and regional presence, this component will enhance the sharing of knowledge
and expertise from Bulgaria.
27. The overall aim is to remove the remaining bottlenecks to systematically
assess persisting gaps in achieving equitable health and developmental outcomes for
all children, so as to unlock the full potential of existing child rights monitoring
structures and current child rights guarantee systems. This component will
contribute towards the mobilization of support, capacity and reso urces by a national
alliance for children (involving the Government, the international community, civil
society, the private sector and the media) to significantly advance the rights of
Bulgarian children and youth. The expected results are: (a) more disag gregated data
on children, systematically gathered, with good practices documented and shared, as
well as reliable information on child rights violations; (b) a strong and independent
system, with the capacity and responsibility to promote child rights, re gularly
assesses the impact of public policies on excluded and marginalized children, and
ensure accessible and effective complaint mechanisms for children and their
representatives; and (c) “observatories” of the situation of children in the most
deprived areas in the country through private-public partnerships.
28. Overcoming barriers to social inclusion will also require strengthening social
norms of solidarity with children and families living in difficult conditions, cultural
sensitivity and respect for diversity. This will generate a new “ethos for children”,
which will be measured by: (a) an improved understanding of child rights and the
capacity of media to monitor child rights violations with sensitivity to children;
(b) better informed and engaged children and adolescents, and guarantees in place
for their voices to be heard; (c) a corporate sector and media that systematically
adopt standards (including ethical standards of reporting) to protect and advocate for
child rights and create alliances in support of children; (d) a network of ChildFriendly Municipalities as strong advocates for child -friendly policies at the local

9

level; (e) a set of good practices and expertise from Bulgaria made available to other
countries facing similar challenges; and (f) a general public that appreciates and
supports initiatives for excluded children, in Bulgaria as well as in other countries.
29. Strategies to remove bottlenecks to equity and inclusion will focus on
accompanying ongoing public sector reforms and will enhance the capacity of
national institutions for: the collection of reliable and disaggregated data on children
and equity mapping, knowledge management and facilitating the exchange of
innovative approaches and practices across borders; regular monito ring and
reporting on the impact of policies, regulations and budgetary decisions on excluded
children; and setting up systematic processes for supporting existing and new
independent bodies for child rights monitoring and redress mechanisms.
30. Overcoming persistent social barriers to inclusion will also call for sustained
communication for development approaches. These will involve the general public,
experts and local communities to tackle harmful traditional practices and social
norms, and help to change attitudes, behaviours and societal beliefs about Roma and
other minorities and excluded groups, such as children with disabilities and the
children affected by institutional care. Efforts will also involve fostering the
capacity of public administration, civil society organizations and the media to detect
and report child rights violations, advocate for and monitor child rights
implementation, and articulate joint positions on key issues related to the
advancement and implementation of child rights; alliance-building with the business
sector, media and prominent personalities for building a more socially responsible
and equitable society; and work with relevant government bodies and local
governments to create meaningful opportunities and mechanisms for t he
participation of children and adolescent boys and girls in making decisions on issues
affecting their lives.
31. This component will engage the public, the media and the corporate sector in
supporting children in Bulgaria and in other parts of the world . It will generate a
diversified resource-leveraging portfolio using innovative resource mobilization
approaches in support of UNICEF work in Bulgaria, international emergencies and
UNICEF resources. Integrated advocacy with partners will be a key strategy. This
will be supported through resource mobilization and communication campaigns
focusing on communication for development and public appeals for the
advancement of priority areas in child rights and well -being for children in Bulgaria
and for international emergencies. These efforts will also promote the development
of a strong base of supporters and social networks.
32. Cross-sectoral. This component will support important functions in the office,
such as monitoring and evaluation, as well as operational costs, including utilities
and travel, office support and other staff-related costs.
Relationship to national priorities
33. This country partnership was developed to support key national priorities.
These include: (a) the National Reform Programme (2011-2015) and its Plan of
Action, which identify social inclusion policies and reduction of poverty targets as a
vital part of overall government policies; (b) the National Strategy for the Child
2008-2018, which sets key objectives for strengthening social inclusion and
reduction of child poverty, ensuring equal access to education and health care and
promoting child participation, and aiming at enhancing good parenting practices and

10

skills and support to families; (c) the national strategy “Vision for th e
Deinstitutionalization of Children in Bulgaria”, which describes the clear
government commitments and plans towards reforming the child care and protection
system in the best interests of the child through the provision of better support to
families and children and the implementation of prevention programmes to reduce
abandonment and exclusion; and (d) the National Strategy for Roma Integration
2012-2018, which sets out clear priorities in key areas such as health and education
for Roma and other minority groups, providing measures for reducing the
vulnerabilities of the most disadvantaged groups.
34. While Bulgaria does not have a United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, there is good operational cooperation with other United Nations entities
represented in the country, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Relationship to international priorities
35. The proposed areas of partnership are in line with the Europe 2020 strategy,
the EU Agenda for the Rights of the Child and the EU Framework for the national
Roma integration strategies, adopted in 2011, which aims to encourage Member
States to adopt or develop further a comprehensive approach to Roma integration.
National Strategies should set realistic, achievable national goals for Roma
integration in four crucial areas (employment, education, housing and health) and
allocate sufficient funding supporting Roma integratio n from national budgets,
complemented by international or EU funding.
36. The EU growth strategy for the current decade provides a clear opportunity for
leveraging investments and actions benefiting the most vulnerable groups, as it aims
to develop a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy, characterized by high levels
of employment, productivity and social cohesion. Education and social inclusion are
given a special priority.
37. The proposed country partnership will also contribute to addressing the 20 08
Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. These call
for the full integration of minorities into Bulgarian society, increased support to
families with children, in particular for those living in poverty and families caring
for children with disabilities, as well as the development of a systematic approach to
increasing public awareness of the rights of children to express their views and be
heard. The country partnership will also support achieving progress on
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, as well as the relevant provisions of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
38. Bulgaria aims to develop its financial contribution as official developmen t
assistance for supporting development programmes. The proposed partnership with
UNICEF will aim to further the contribution of Bulgaria to global support for
children.
Major partnerships
39. The strategic intent of this Bulgaria-UNICEF partnership is to further enhance
the capacities of key actors in the country to advance social inclusion and child

11

rights. Strengthening existing alliances and building new ones will be essential.
Major national partners for the implementation of the component on equi ty and
social inclusion include the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Labour and Social Policy,
Education and Science, Health, Finance, Interior, Regional Development, and
Justice; the Council of Ministers, the State Agency for Child Protection; the Agency
for Social Assistance; Parliament; and local governments.
40. The component on alliances and national capacity for child rights monitoring
will further enhance the partnership with the above -mentioned government
Ministries and institutions. In addition, it calls for stronger links with the
Ombudsman’s Office to strengthen independent monitoring and with the National
Statistical Institute for the collection of reliable and disaggregated data. Partnerships
with local governments will be consolidated further through the National
Association of Municipalities.
41. Alliances with civil society, CSOs, children’s representatives, the media at
national and local levels, as well as the private sector will be key to actively engage
society in the promotion of the progressive realization of the rights of all children.
Existing collaboration with institutes of research and science, universities and
centres for policy development and analysis will be expanded, with the intention of
improving evidence-based policy formulation for better planning and delivering
results for children.
42. Closer collaboration will continue with the European Commission and the
World Bank on social inclusion and child poverty, while exchanges with United
Nations entities represented in the country (WHO, UNFPA and UNHCR) will be
sought in health promotion and emergency preparedness for natural disasters such as
floods or earthquakes.
Monitoring, evaluation and cooperation modalities
43. The implementation of the partnership will be monitored through joint annual
reviews and midterm progress assessment against established benchmarks and
progress indicators. Key data, information and evaluations will inform the reviews.
Baselines will be established in each main area of cooperation and results a chieved
will be measured through key indicators. These include the rate of children
0-3 years old in institutions, broken down by the children’s backgrounds, and in the
most disadvantaged areas: the percentage of local governments providing innovative
early childhood development services and parenting skills, as well as the primary
school enrolment rate for boys and girls. This will also involve an analysis of the
capacities of institutions responsible for child rights as well as an assessment of the
normative framework that is conducive to child rights and the consultative processes
with adolescents on public policy and strategies.
44. Further collaboration will be sought with the National Institute of Statistics for
improving disaggregated data collection and analysis, addressing data gaps for the
making of evidence-based policy and strategy. In 2013 an independent assessment
of implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child will be pursued, as
part of the regular State reporting to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
45. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy
will have overall responsibility for coordination of the cooperation for Bulgaria.

12

