Burundi
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Burundi
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.3) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 annual session (8-10 June
2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

†

Basic data
(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

4.4

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

180

Underweight (% moderate and severe, 2005)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1993-2005)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)

39
620 a
76/73

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

78

Use of improved drinking water sources (%,2006)

71

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

41

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

2b

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)
GNI per capita (US$)

19
110

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

74

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

75

†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at
http://www.unicef.org.
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 1,100 per 100,000 live births. For
more information, see http://www.childinfo.org/areas/maternalmortality/.
A survey by the National AIDS Control Commission (CNLS) conducted in 2007 indicates a
prevalence rate of 3.58% for the population segment aged 15-49 years.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
With 8.03 million inhabitants and a 2.9 per cent growth rate, 1 Burundi has one
of the highest population densities in Africa (300 persons/ km2). Ranked 172 out of
179 countries in the 2009 Human Development Index 2, Burundi has seen poverty
increase from 48 to 67 per cent between 1994 and 2006. Children and women are
especially affected and suffer disproportionately from poor access to social services,
illiteracy and food insecurity. Despite low productivity of small farms, loss of
livestock during the war and lack of agricultural inputs, food crop production is
growing in line with population growth, following a 28 per cent decline between
1993 and 2006. Rising food prices (28 per cent in 2007-2008) affect livelihood and
increase vulnerability to threats such as flooding, droughts, landslides and the
impact of climate change. It is unlikely that Burundi will reach Millennium
Development Goal 1. An annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 5 per cent
is required to halve the poverty rate by 2016; the country achieved a 3.2 per cent
growth in 2007, following a decade in which GDP per capita fell by 33 per cent. 3
2.
As Burundi moves from post-conflict recovery to development,
implementation and monitoring of the peace process within the Strategic Framework
for Peacebuilding in Burundi (SFPB) continues under Security Council resolution
__________________
1
2
3

2

The growth rate will likely increase with populations returning from Tanza nia.
Human Development Report 2009, based on 2008 data.
World Bank Data.

1719. The mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), led
by an Executive Representative of the Secretary-General, continues under Security
Council resolution 1858 until December 2009. As a permanent member of the
Peacebuilding Commission Steering Committee, co-chaired by BINUB and the
Government of Burundi, UNICEF heads the integrated group on monitoring and
evaluation and co-chairs the group on human rights. Under the leadership of the
Humanitarian Coordinator, UNICEF leads the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
humanitarian clusters on nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and
education, and the child protection sub-cluster.
3.
The security situation remains fragile, with the entire country reclassified to
Phase Three. Nevertheless, following the agreement signed between the
Government and the remaining rebel group, Palipehutu-National Forces of
Liberation (FNL), on the 4 December 2008, significant strides have been taken in
the Burundian peace process: FNL officially became a political party in April 2009,
after dropping the ethnic connotation of its name. In April 2009, 340 children were
separated from FNL and returned to their families and communities. One month
later, the last group of 40 children was separated from the ‘dissident’ faction of
FNL. The main challenge is to ensure a sustained reintegration of the children.
Elections scheduled for 2010 require further reconciliation. Land conflicts ,
criminality, banditry, and targeted murders are major challenges to social
reconstruction. Protection of children’s and women’s rights remains a problem —
with serious cases of exploitation and abuse of vulnerable groups, such as street
children, working children, children associated with armed groups, children in
prison, orphans and vulnerable children — as does sexual and gender-based
violence. The rights of marginalized groups are threatened, including the indigenous
Batwa people, albinos and children with disabilities.
4.
Two field offices were established in 2004, Ruyigi and Makamba (closed in
2007) to strengthen the UNICEF response to natural disasters and to the increasing
numbers of returnees from Tanzania, who had fled Burundi in 1972 and 1993. Since
2002, over 491,000 returnees and 313,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) have
been reintegrated in the country. This is a challenge, given the broken families, the
landless status of some 30 per cent of refugees and the need for children born in
Tanzania to learn a new language, as well as the pressure on already overstretched
social services. Reintegration will continue in 2009 for some 73,800 repatriated
refugees and 117,000 IDPs.
5.
With the war, infant mortality escalated within a decade, from 113 per 1,000
live births in 1990 to 156 per 1,000 live births in 2000, while under-five child
mortality increased from 189 per live births to 233 per 1,000 live births. By 2007,
mortality rates fell to below pre-war levels: 108 per 1,000 live births for infants and
180 per 1,000 live births for children under five years of age. Immunization
coverage has increased for eight antigens and vitamin A supplementation, from
72 per cent and 38 per cent, respectively, in 2000 to 94 per cent and 96 per cent,
respectively, in 2007 (Ministry of Public Health). Direct causes of mortality are
neonatal deaths (40 per 1,000 live births) and inadequate preventio n and treatment
of malaria, diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections. Contributing factors are
declines in access to clean drinking water and sanitation, dropping to 69 per cent
and 32 per cent, respectively, in 2005 (Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey [M ICS]),
as well as inadequate hygiene, poor feeding practices, food insecurity and associated
large numbers of stunted and underweight children, with (combined moderate and

3

severe) prevalence rates of 53 per cent and 39 per cent, respectively. Strong
leadership and commitment will enable further progress towards reducing child
mortality (Goal 4) and attainment of the clean drinking water target (Goal 7).
Malaria incidence and HIV prevalence have declined since 2002, although strong
action is required to reduce HIV infection, especially in prevention of mother-tochild transmission of HIV (PMTCT), paediatric treatment, and education of
adolescents and youths on preventive practices (Goal 6).
6.
Between 2000 and 2007, Burundi experienced an impressive drop in maternal
mortality, from 800 per 100,000 live births to 620 per 100,000 live births, despite
the persistence of inadequate maternal and obstetric care. Following the introduction
of free health facility-assisted deliveries in 2006, initial antenatal visits increased
from 78 per cent to 98 per cent between 2000 and 2007, while birth assistance
increased from 25 per cent to 41 per cent during the same period (Ministry of
Health). Although this is an important initiative, it further strains an already weak
health system.
7.
The abolition of primary school fees in 2005/2006 led to increased net
enrolment rates, rising from 59 per cent in 2004/2005 to 84.6 per cent in 2007/2008,
with gross enrolment increasing from 81 per cent to 122.7 per cent over the same
period 4. This has especially benefited a large number of over-age children who
dropped out of school during the war. However, improved access creates further
challenges to the quality of primary education, such as lack of qualified teachers and
learning materials, inadequate school infrastructure, overcrowded classrooms
(86 children per class), and reduced learning times (3.5 hours per day). This resulted
in a repetition rate of 30.3 per cent and a completion rate of 40 per cent in 2006. 5
Particularly affected are older girls and the members of vulnerable groups; in
addition, significant geographical and gender disparities remain. Nevertheless,
universal primary education (Goal 2) can be attained, provided that national
leadership pursues improved qualitative standards.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation
(2005-2008)
Key results achieved
8.
The key results expected were reductions in child and maternal mortality and
mother-to-child transmission of HIV, increases in access to clean drinking water and
basic sanitation, as well as improvements in the protective environment. These were
brought about by influencing policy analysis, leveraging resources, collecting
reliable data on child poverty and encouraging participation of children, yo uth and
women, as well as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society, at
central, provincial and community levels. Emergency preparedness and response
(EPR) has been mainstreamed within a framework of peacebuilding, reconstruction
and development.
9.
One key results area focused on addressing grave child rights violations.
UNICEF participation in the United Nations Peacekeeping Commission technical
team within the BINUB integrated framework added value to joint programming: on
__________________
4
5

4

Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education statistics, February 2009.
World Bank estimates.

children associated with armed groups; prevention of maiming and killing; sexual
violence; attacks on schools and hospitals; abduction; addressing the denial of
humanitarian access; and reintegration of IDPs and returnees.
10. There were a number of key results on technical assistance in areas of
comparative advantage of UNICEF: contributions to policy development; the
inclusion of key priorities for child survival (PMTCT and paediatric care) into the
revised 2006-2010 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP); 6 and the shaping of
subsequent action plans. Contributions were made towards the development of a
road map for maternal mortality reduction, the sector-wide approach in education,
the preparation of the International Health Partnership Agreement, adoption and
promotion of the community-led total sanitation approach and the national strategic
plan against HIV and AIDS, as well as validation the national reproductive health
policy. Support was provided to the education sector plan (2008 -2016) and,
following a gender audit at primary level, to the development of a girls’ education
policy, as well as to an intersectoral policy on early childhood development (ECD).
In addition, national action plans were approved for the justice sector (2006 -2009),
orphaned and vulnerable children (OVC) (2007-2011) and hygiene and sanitation
(2008-2010).
11. Key achievements in primary health care include the following: 750,000 free
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLITN) distributed to 430,000 pregnant
women and 320,000 children under five in 2007-2008; an additional 2 million nets
leveraged for distribution in 2009; acute malnutrition prevalence reduced to less
than 10 per cent; and deworming initiatives benefiting 4.2 million children and
100,000 pregnant women. UNICEF advocacy was instrumental in the abolition of
primary school fees (starting in 2005/2006) and of birth registration fees for
children under five (in August 2008), as well as in the adoption of free health care
for children under five and pregnant women during delivery (in 2 006). The Penal
Code was recently approved by Parliament.
12. Specific results were achieved in the education sector: (a) primary school
gender parity ratio increased from 0.91 in 2005/2006 to at least 1 in four of the
17 provinces in August 2007; (b) 40,400 children benefited from 800 newly
constructed classrooms; (c) learning materials were provided to 400,000 OVCs in
the 2007/2008 school year and to 350,000 children in public schools in the three
provinces with the lowest education indicators in 2008/200 9; (d) the capacity of
5,000 teachers and 10,000 educators and parents was strengthened; (e) some 875
repatriated children benefited from intensive language classes; and (f) over 1,250
out-of-school children participated in a catch-up programme.
13. In the area of HIV, women and children benefited from PMTCT and treatment
for paediatric AIDS, with an increase from 22 to 104 facilities during 2006 -2008.
UNICEF support allowed the 2008-2010 plan for PMTCT and paediatric care to be
scaled up, helped Burundi gain access the 8th round of grants from the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria ($127 million), and encouraged the
integration of HIV and AIDS education into primary and secondary school curricula.
__________________
6

The PRSP, referred to as Cadre Strategique de Lutte contre la Pauvreté (CSLP), was adopted by
the Government in September 2006, covering the period 2006-2009. During the review of the
first-year implementation it was decided that the PRSP would end in 2010 and a new one be
developed.

5

14. In the area of communication for social change, UNICEF advocacy helped
strengthen the national commitment to children’s rights, as evinced in the debates in
Parliament leading to the approval of the National Action Plan for OVCs.
15. Attention was given to emergency issues, resulting in the development of an
EPR plan led by the Government; since 2008, the plan is being coordinated by the
National Civil Protection Platform and supported through the cluster approach.
16. In 2008, the Government of Burundi submitted its first periodic report on the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
UNICEF promoted the translation and dissemination of the document and also
supported the preparation of alternative reports by non -governmental organizations
(NGOs). Burundi’s first periodic report on the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women is expected in 2009. UNICEF and local
partners will support the Government in the preparation of this report and in
reporting on the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child (on children in armed conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography).
17. The peacebuilding process facilitated the reintegration of returnee families.
Children associated with armed groups successfully returned to their families and
communities.
18. The availability of updated disaggregated data and access to that data was
improved with the MICS (2005), and the setting-up of an updated version of the
national socio-economic database (BurundInfo). National surveys were conducted
on nutrition (2005, 2007), HIV (2007) and school environment and its impact on
health (2007-2008). The population census conducted in August 2008 was supported
by UNICEF.
19. The validation of the situation analysis of children and women in August 2008
helped to fill the outstanding gaps in reviewing the PRSP and in identifying gaps to
achieving Goals.
20. Against the $41.5 million resources to be leveraged during the period
2005-2008, a total of $25.7 million 7 was mobilized from the following donors:
(a) bilateral partners (Governments of Belgium and Japan); (b) multilateral agencies
(European Commission; World Bank); and (c) development partners (Canadian
International Development Agency (CIDA); Swedish International Cooperation
Agency (SIDA); Department for International Development (DFID) of the United
Kingdom).
Lessons learned
21. For 2005-2008, efforts focused mainly on the humanitarian assistance. This
resulted in a weakness in programme convergence, as most interventions were
vertical. As Burundi moves towards a development framework, programme
convergence will be reinforced to achieve cost-effective and high-impact
interventions aimed at accelerating a decrease in child mortality.
__________________
7

6

The planned amount for 2005-2008 was $34.9 million. In 2008, the country office requested a
ceiling increase of $6.6 million as a result of expected pledged contributions ($13.5 million - EU
Water Facility). However, the pledged funds were held as a result of the security situation of the
country.

22. Due to advocacy and communication measures, promotion of children ’s rights,
child protection, HIV/AIDS reduction, and youth development were placed on the
political agenda. However, protection activities remain ill -defined and poorly
focused and need a clearly articulated comprehensive strategy, while the separate
HIV/AIDS programme made it difficult to undertake integrated programming and
monitoring.
23. A joint project by UNICEF, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), World Food Programme (WFP) and World Health Organization (WHO)
to support the reintegration of returnees led to cost -efficient interventions and
greater participation and ownership by the Government. A steering committee was
instituted, which meets monthly at UNICEF and is co-chaired by the Minister of
Solidarity and UNICEF.
24. Child survival and development needs closer monitoring of indicators leading
to a reduction of child mortality and a stronger focus on cost -effective, high-impact
interventions, especially community- and home-based care, improved feeding and
food fortification practices for pregnant and nursing women, improved water,
sanitation and hygiene practices, PMTCT and paediatric care, and a stronger
emphasis on ECD.
25. Analysis of the national statistics for the last three years and the preliminary
results from the gender audit of the primary education sector show geographic and
gender disparities. Consequently, a gender strategy is proposed, to strengthen
equitable outcomes in access, retention and completion rates for girls and boys.

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health and nutrition

14 800

21 850

36 650

Basic education, gender equality
and HIV prevention in young
people

11 835

15 795

27 630

Water, sanitation and hygiene

4 935

2 015

6 950

Child protection

6 905

4 580

11 485

Communication for Development

2 308

1 565

3 873

Cross-sectoral

8 542

4 195

12 737

Total

49 325

50 000

99 325

Preparation process
26. The joint development of UNDAF+ 8 by the United Nations and Government of
Burundi was a participatory process, involving civil society and bilateral partners
__________________
8

As a follow up to Security Council resolution 1719, BINUB was established on 1 January 2007.

7

who contributed to the overall programme orientation, enabling a harmonization of
the country programme document with UNDAF+. Annual reviews and the situation
analysis provided national reference points and information about the capacity gaps.
A joint review of the 2008 bridging programme by the Government, UNICEF and
civil society and a general programming meeting were followed by joint sector
meetings that reviewed the situation and proposed results and strategies. The
validation exercise of the situation analysis in 2008 provided rights holders and duty
bearers at the decentralized level an opportunity to validate the findings and
participate in the country programme’s development. A joint meeting among
government, United Nations and other partners in January 2009 validated the
country programme within the framework of the UNDAF+ (2010-2014).
Goals, key results and strategies
27. The overall programme goal is to contribute to child survival and development
through cost-effective, high-impact interventions, using human rights-based and
results-based management approaches, geared to advancement toward Millennium
Development Goal targets.
28. Health and nutrition programme. This programme will contribute to the
reduction of infant mortality rate from 108 to 72 per 1,000 live births, under five
mortality rate from 180 to 120 per 1,000 live births and maternal morality ratio from
620 to 415 per 100,000 live births through the following key results: (a) complete
immunization levels are over 90 per cent; (b) 60 per cent of births are attended by
skilled personnel; (c) 60 per cent of pregnant women benefit from PMTCT services
in compliance with WHO recommendations, with access to paediatric treatment
where necessary; (d) 80 per cent of pregnant women and children under five sleep
under LLITNs; (e) intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria for 50 per cent of
women attending ante-natal visits; (f) prevalence of underweight children under five
is reduced to 29 per cent; and (g) 80 per cent of children are exclusively breastfed
up to 6 months.
29. Basic education, gender equality and HIV prevention for young people
programme. This programme will achieve the following key results: (a) national
policies and strategies approved for reducing repetition and drop -out and improving
availability of text books and teacher training; (b) a ccess to primary education
expanded by increasing learning opportunities for primary school girls and boys
through provision of education materials, learning spaces and special programmes to
promote gender equity in selected provinces with high rates of di sparities; (c) all
children and caregivers participating in ECD centres benefit from an ho listic
package of interventions; 9 (d) child-friendly schools are set up in 90 per cent of
schools in selected provinces; (e) HIV prevention is effectively taught in s chools;
and (f) 80 per cent of adolescents and youths (12-19 years) have the knowledge
needed to reduce HIV risk and vulnerability.
30. Water, sanitation and hygiene programme. This programme will contribute
to the following key results: (a) increased household access to quality drinking
water and improved sanitation, with coverage rising to 76 per cent and 71 per cent,
respectively, and particular attention given to vulnerable and marginalized
__________________

9

8

UNDAF is replaced by UNDAF+ to reflect the United Nations support framework to peace
consolidation and development in Burundi.
Education, nutrition and feeding practices, environmental sanitation, hygiene and protection.

populations; (b) 80 per cent of households in provinces with lo west access to water
and basic sanitation have improved hygiene practices, with a focus on hand washing
with soap/ash, safe household water storage and treatment, and latrine use; and
(c) overall increase in water supply and gender-separate sanitary facilities in
primary schools, including full (100 per cent) access for schools in provinces with
the lowest coverage.
31. Child protection programme. This programme will achieve the following
key results: (a) existing child protection committees are strengthene d and regulated;
(b) justice for children is recognized within the judiciary system, including
child-friendly procedures for child victims, witnesses and offenders; (c) data
collection and analysis on child rights violations, including child trafficking an d
exploitation and use of children in prostitution and pornography, conducted and
used in reports on international conventions; (d) 50 per cent of nationally estimated
OVCs have access to an efficient child protection system that responds to their
immediate needs, as defined in the national OVC policy; and (e) strategies for
prevention and response to violence, abuse and exploitation of children integrated in
communal development plans.
32. Communication for development programme. This programme will
contribute to the achievement of the following key results: (a) community -level
participatory research on behavioural practices help develop messages aimed at
changing practices that contribute to reducing child mortality and improving the
lives of children; and (b) monitoring indicators developed and studies carried out
(one baseline and two additional studies at key intervals, such as midterm and
end-of-cycle reviews) to regularly monitor changes in behaviour, attitudes and
practices.
33. The overall strategy will be rights- and results-based in purpose and
management, and will combine advocacy and policy dialogue at the national level
and service delivery down to the household level for the promotion of children ’s
rights. UNICEF will focus on the most vulnerable and marginalised groups, aiming
to reduce geographic, social and gender disparities. HIV interventions will be
integrated into the programmes on health and nutrition, basic education and child
protection. Communication for development will contribute to behaviour change
and participation in decision-making by duty bearers and rights holders. Planning
and monitoring will support programme design and tracking of results, while EPR
will be cross-cutting, to enable a flexible, intersectoral response. The fiel d office
will be relocated to Gitega to improve programme delivery, enhance the joint United
Nations response and increase efficiency.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF+
34. Programme strategies are aligned with national priorities as d efined in the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi, the PRSP (2006 -2010), the
Burundi 2025 vision and other policy documents, in particular for health, WASH,
education, ECD and OVCs. A national gender policy has been approved but not yet
implemented.
35. In 2008, the Government opted for the principle of a longer-term vision rather
than bridging operations. UNICEF participated in the internal thematic groups that
reviewed the previous UNDAF+ and, in 2008, contributed to the human rights -based
joint United Nations/Government development of UNDAF+ (2010 -2014), which

9

provides the overall orientation for the country programme. Results contribute to all
four UNDAF+ pillars. UNICEF will continue to co-chair with BINUB the Task
Force on Monitoring and Reporting pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612.
Relationship to international priorities
36. The country programme will contribute to the priorities of a World Fit for
Children; the Millennium Development Goals; the Millennium Declaration ’s call for
human development and human rights; and human rights treaties, particularly the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child. Programmes are aligned with the key result areas of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, including EPR. The country programme
integrates the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005) and
the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and takes into account the 2008 United Nations
General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS and the Abuja Declarations on
Roll Back Malaria (2000) and on HIV and AIDS, Tuberculosis and Other Infectious
Diseases (2001).
Programme components
37. Based on the lessons learned and in order to accelerate child survival
development, the country programme comprises five components, all of which have
country coverage, with special emphasis on vulnerable and marginalized
populations.
38. Health and nutrition programme. This programme includes two projects and
will contribute to the development of policies and strategies to strengthen the
national health system and improve its management. The child health project will
scale up child survival development interventions with WHO and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and promote child caring practices. The
nutrition project will support health services and community -based prevention,
surveillance and treatment of pregnant women and child undernutrition. In addition
to reducing the prevalence of underweight and stunted children, it will s trengthen
referral and management capacities for acute malnutrition.
39. Basic education, gender equality and HIV prevention for young people
programme. This programme will contribute to universal primary education by
addressing education access and equity, retention and completion of quality primary
education for the most vulnerable children, and the prevention of HIV among
adolescents. These key results will be achieved through four interrelated projects:
(a) policy support for basic education; (b) equity of access to primary education;
(c) ECD; and (d) quality basic education.
40. Water, sanitation and hygiene programme. This programme has two
interdependent components, aimed at reducing child mortality through a
combination of policy support, strategy and capacity development, and efficient and
sustainable interventions. The programme will emphasize behaviour change in
households and schools by putting in place sustainable community-managed
maintenance and rehabilitation of water facilities, construction of new
infrastructures or expansion of existing facilities in schools.
41. Child protection programme. This programme will strengthen the capacity of
the justice and social protection systems to better protect children from abuse,

10

violence and exploitation. The programme will advocate improved child protection
legislation and promote an integrated child protection strategy. It will support
(a) institutional capacity building of local authorities and civil society as well as
(b) monitoring of and reporting on international and regional standards of child
protection. The national child protection system will be strengthened, to be more
consistent and competent in monitoring and responding to violence, exploitation,
abuse, neglect and discrimination against children; and opportunities will be
realized to improve child protection in post-conflict transition and recovery.
42. Communication for development programme. This programme will focus
on strengthening the capacity at the household and community levels to ma ke
choices that will improve the lives of women and children, especially by reducing
child mortality. At the community level, the programme will support increasing
knowledge and changing attitudes of local leaders, faith-based organizations and
duty bearers regarding child caring practices.
43. Programme components will be supported by anchor interventions. Social
policy, evidence-based advocacy and alliances for children will be reinforced. A
strengthened programme planning and monitoring unit will ensure implementation
of the programme, support national, decentralised and local monitoring of
programme results and UNDAF+ outcomes, promote mechanisms to mainstream
gender equity and coordinate HIV/AIDS programme priorities.
44. Cross-sectoral costs cover management of and support for the country
programme, including coordination, technical assistance and operating expenses
related to supply, logistics, administration and finance.
Major partnerships
45. Under government leadership, UNICEF will continue to work with BINUB
and United Nations agencies within UNDAF+ towards the achievement of the PRSP
and the Millennium Development Goals. UNICEF will continue to co -chair the Task
Force on Monitoring and Reporting pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612.
Joint programming will be conducted with a number of United Nations system
partners: with UNHCR, WFP and OCHA to support IDPs and returnees and
vulnerable groups affected by other emergencies; with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and WFP for food security evaluation and
with WFP for nutrition; with WHO and UNFPA for health policy development,
training and strategic support to health services, including reproductive health; with
UNAIDS and UNFPA in support of HIV/AIDS coordination, prevention and
mitigation; with UNESCO for education; and with the World Bank for programme
implementation and scaling-up.
46. Other partners include, within Burundi, the Parliament, the media and civil
society, especially in the areas of advocacy and alliance-building, dissemination of
information and facilitation of open debate that is inclusive of adolescent and youth
participation. International and national NGOs as well as political authorities will
play a prominent role in the achievement of results. Decentralized programming and
implementation will take place with local authorities, NGOs and community - and
faith-based organizations. Social mobilization activities and training of stakeholders
will include umbrella organizations for women and yout h.

11

47. The programme will rely on partnerships with donors: bilateral partners
(including the Governments of Japan, Norway and the United States of America);
multilateral agencies (European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office; Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; GAVI — Global Alliance for Vaccine and
Immunization; World Bank); and development partners (Technical Centre for
Agricultural and Rural Cooperation; German Agency for Technical Cooperation;
United States Agency for International Development (USAID); DFID; CIDA; SIDA;
and the development agencies of Belgium, Italy, Japan and Norway). UNICEF will
continue to work with regional bodies such as the International Conference for the
Great Lakes Region, the East African Community and the Afri can Union.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. Planning and monitoring will support evidence-based review of results and
analysis of progress towards intermediate and final goals at national, provincial and
community levels. Baseline indicators will be produced at the beginning of the
programme, developing more detailed gender-disaggregated indicators to monitor
progress during programme implementation. Planning and monitoring will be
structured at three levels: (a) at the UNICEF country office level to monitor the
management of programme delivery through well-documented information
supported by a database of findings from field visits, programme and management
meetings, workshops and annual and midterm evaluations; (b) at the national le vel
to build government and civil society capacity in supplying information and
managing the national database of indicators through BurundInfo; and (c) the United
Nations Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Group, to ensure harmonized and
coordinated monitoring and evaluation benchmarks, tools and indicators for the
United Nations system agencies in Burundi.
49. Information sources include the 2008 population census and routine
decentralized statistics from the National Institute of Statistics and Economi c
Studies (ISTEEBU) and sector ministries, data from United Nations agencies
(UNHCR for repatriation, WFP and FAO for food security and other sources
identified in the UNDAF+ monitoring and evaluation plan), studies, surveys, and
evaluations. Improving the timeliness and reliability of national data will be a
priority. Support will be provided for an analysis of the 2008 population census and
a Demographic and Health Survey planned for late 2009. A number of areas have
been identified for further study: impact of the HIV epidemic on the school system;
child and family vulnerability; school retention and achievement; community -based
preventive health and nutrition; and behavioural change in health, nutrition, WASH
and HIV practices.
50. The Ministry of Planning and Reconstruction will monitor indicators and
progress towards the PRSP and the UNDAF+ through BurundInfo. ISTEEBU will
work within a decentralized framework to collect information on trends and provide
disaggregated data on disparities to BurundInfo. Regular monitoring of the early
warning system, feeding into the EPR, will be an important aspect of monitoring
and evaluation.
51. The country programme will be overseen and coordinated by the Ministry of
External Affairs and Cooperation, which will carry out annual programme reviews
and a midterm review together with UNICEF and sector ministries. A
comprehensive country programme evaluation will take place at the end of 2014.

12

13

