Cambodia
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Cambodia
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.7) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 annual session (1-4 June
2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

†

Basic data
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

6.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

90

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)

28

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)

470
91/87

Survival rate to last primary grade (%)

55

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

65

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

28

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.8

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old)
GNI per capita (US$)

45
600

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

91

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

89

†

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Cambodia has one of the youngest populations in Southeast Asia, with 41 per
cent of its population of 13.4 million under the age of 18 and more than a third
between the ages of 10 and 24 years (2008 census). The rate of birth registration
(64.4 per cent) varies greatly according to wealth and geographic location.
2.
From 1997 to 2008, Cambodia’s economic growth rate was second in Asia
only to that of China, but this period also saw growing income inequality. While
latest poverty measurements show continued improvement, with rates dropping to
30 per cent in 2007, the World Bank estimates that poverty has risen by 1-4 per cent
in 2008-2009, as a result of the impact of the global economic crisis.
3.
The Government’s decentralization and deconcentration reform is making
steady progress, including institutionalization of women and children’s consultative
committees. Based on the Cambodia gender assessment done in 2008, the
Government’s five-year strategic plan for gender equality (Neary Rattanak III,
2009-2013) provides a framework to address prevailing gender disparities.
4.
Cambodia’s combined second and third periodic report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child was submitted in March 2009. Many of the concluding
observations on the first report, considered in 2000, have been addressed. However,
recommendations to allocate budgets for the social sectors to the maximum extent
of available resources and to increase human and financial resources for the
Cambodian National Council for Children remain valid.
5.
A recent analysis of the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs)
highlights good progress towards Goals 4, 6 and 9, while Goals 1 and 3 are
realizable with additional effort. Goals 2, 5 and 7 were rated off track and

2

unachievable. While the exclusive breastfeeding rate (66 per cent) is one of the
highest in Asia, and iodized salt usage is over 70 per cent, progress in other key
nutrition indicators since 2005 has halted or advanced only little. A 2008 national
anthropometric survey showed significant increases in the rate of acute malnutrition
among poor urban children, from 9.6 per cent in 2005 to 15.9 per cent in 2008.
6.
Recent census data (2008) show that the infant mortality rate dropped to 60 per
1,000 live births in 2008, down from 66 per 1,000 live births in 2005, indicating that
Cambodia is on track to meet the target of 50 per 1,000 live births in 2015. Despite
this progress, child mortality in Cambodia remains among the highest in Asia, and
future progress depends on the country’s ability to tackle neonatal mortality. The
census indicated no change over the past decade in the maternal mo rtality ratio.
7.
The National Centre for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases presently estimates adult HIV prevalence at 0.7 per cent, down from 3 per
cent in 1997 and already surpassing the CMDG target of 1.8 per cent. The HIV
epidemic is concentrated among higher-risk, largely young populations, and an
increasing proportion of women are becoming infected as a result of spousal
transmission.
8.
The 2008 census showed the ratio of literate females to males in the 15 -24
year age group at 95.7 per cent, indicating great progress. The education
management information system (EMIS) in 2008 indicated that, despite progress,
the ratio of girls to boys in both primary and secondary schools is still lagging, at
between 72.9 per cent and 90.2 per cent, most acutely in remote areas with ethnic
minorities. Goal 2 is off track mainly due to the ambitious target of achieving nine year primary and lower secondary education. Though EMIS shows primary net
enrolment for 2008 surpassing 94 per cent, high rates of over-age enrolment and
repetition have led to a lower secondary net enrolment ratio of just 33.9 per cent.
9.
The 2008 census showed rural access to an improved source of drinking water
at 41 per cent and rural access to improved sanitation at 23 p er cent. Goal 7 targets
of 50 per cent and 30 per cent, respectively, are thus within reach.
10. The Cambodia mine victims information system shows mine casualties have
dropped to 243 in 2009, from 1,691 in 1993, on track to meet the CMDG 9 target.
11. The 2008 census indicated 1.6 million children aged 5-17 years are working.
Increased internal and external migration puts many children at risk. There is an
increase in the number of children living in institutional care, while the majority of
the 11,000 children living in some 220 institutions have at least one living parent or
other close relatives. Social attitudes and cultural beliefs lead to children
experiencing violence and abuse at home, school and in institutions. Gender-based
violence remains a significant concern, and 65 per cent of offences reported to the
specialized police department relate to sexual abuse. Currently, 700 children live in
prisons or youth rehabilitation centres. Children in contact with the law as victims,
witnesses and offenders have limited access to justice.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2010
Key results achieved

3

12. Child survival and development. The programme made significant
contributions to increasing immunization coverage, exclusive breastfeeding and
antenatal care utilization. Between 2005 and 2008, the proportion of children
receiving the third dose of diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus and measles vaccines
increased from 82 per cent to 91 per cent and from 79 per cent to 89 per cent ,
respectively. The number of reported measles cases decreased considerably, and
since 2000, the country has maintained its polio-free status. UNICEF support to
tetanus supplemental immunization contributed to potential certification of maternal
and neonatal tetanus elimination in 2011. Partnership in the Second Health Sector
Support Programme, a sector-wide approach, has led to a 63 per cent increase in
allocations to maternal, newborn and child health in 2009, as compared to 2008,
with a further 10 per cent increase foreseen in 2010 annual operational plans.
Contributing approximately $550,000 to pooled funds, UNICEF leveraged more
than $3 million to sustain and expand critical child survival interventions.
13. A mix of sustained media, interpersonal communication and community
mobilization contributed to increases in exclusive breastfeeding rates, from 11 per
cent in 2005 to 66 per cent in 2008. Similarly, in 2009, nationwide coverage of
antenatal care increased by 8 per cent, and by 19 per cent in six UNI CEF-supported
provinces. The programme was instrumental in expanding integrated management of
childhood illness to all health centres in the six focus provinces and for introducing
infant and young feeding and maternal and newborn care packages. These are being
taken to scale through the Second Health Sector Support Programme. UNICEF
technical leadership within this partnership for newborn and child health, nutrition,
communication and community-level interventions has been crucial to achieving
results at greater scale.
14. Local governance for child rights. Programme evaluations and studies show
that commune councils and commune committees for women and children
(CCWCs) supported by UNICEF have successfully modelled potential decentralized
functions related to improving access, performance and oversight of primary health
care, early childhood development, primary education, protection, and water and
sanitation services. As a result, the Government rolled out CCWCs nationwide and
established statutory women and children consultative committees at other levels of
local government. UNICEF-supported communes have also demonstrated capacity
in data use, planning and reporting, and leveraging resources for social provision
through the decentralized planning and budgeting system. Documentation of this
experience has influenced formulation of the National Programme for Sub -national
Democratic Development, and, in recognition, the Government has asked UNICEF
to co-facilitate the dialogue on devolution of functions to c ommune, district and
provincial councils.
15. Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). UNICEF cooperation and advocacy
contributed to positioning rural WASH as a specific sector for priority national
attention, and in 2007 the Prime Minister approved the esta blishment of a dedicated
technical working group tasked with defining the sector strategy. In the six
UNICEF-supported provinces, the target for rural water supply of 55 per cent has
been reached, and all primary schools have access to improved water sourc es and
sanitation facilities, while approximately 20 per cent of 4,140 villages have
implemented the community-led total sanitation approach; 50 per cent of these have
declared open-defecation-free status. At least 10 non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) have adopted the strategy in their programming. Recognizing Cambodia’s

4

innovative experience, the Institute of Development Studies hosted its first Asia Pacific workshop on rural sanitation in Cambodia in November 2009.
16. Expanded basic education. Through UNICEF support to the Planning
Department of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports, working mechanisms
were established to improve coordination and policy dialogue between the Ministry
and development partners, which is bearing fruit in government -led formulation of
the third education strategic plan. UNICEF-supported child-friendly schools (CFS)
and community preschool initiatives were brought to scale through the CFS policy
and master plan and national inter-ministerial early childhood care and development
policy. Successful implementation of UNICEF-supported pilots on multi-grade
teaching and school readiness programmes led to their inclusion into the CFS policy.
Additionally, the national policy and master plan on education for children with
disabilities and guidelines on implementation of education for indigenous children
in highland provinces demonstrate the success of UNICEF-supported pilots focused
on reaching most disadvantaged populations. A study showed that officials in
supported provinces focused school visits on improving teaching practices rather
than administrative procedures, demonstrating positive attitudinal and behavioural
change. Achievements in implementing 936 community and home -based preschools,
reaching 12 per cent of three- to five-year-olds in six focus provinces, include
positive early developmental outcomes for participating children, increased right age enrolment in primary schools, and enhanced community participation and
ownership.
17. HIV/AIDS prevention and care. With 35 per cent of Cambodia’s 251
prevention of mother-to-child transmission sites supported by UNICEF, the
proportion of women receiving anti-retroviral therapy or prophylaxis increased from
4 per cent in 2005 to 31.2 per cent by June 2009. Meanwhile, with UNI CEF
supporting establishment of 62 per cent of the country’s 29 paediatric treatment
sites, the number of children aged 0-14 years living with HIV receiving treatment or
care more than doubled, from 2,220 to 5,072. Resources from the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria will sustain this progress from 2011 onwards.
Supporting primary prevention, the life-skills programme was evaluated before
being rolled out by the Government to selected primary schools in 14 of Cambodia’s
24 provinces. Targeted prevention efforts with young people engaging in high-risk
behaviours reached over 6,100 drug users, including 1,824 females, in the Phnom
Penh area. In partnership with provincial Departments of Cult and Religion and
NGOs, 13,886 adults and 2,209 children affected by AIDS were reached with
spiritual and material support in half the provinces.
18. Child protection. The programme supported passage of core legislation on
inter-country adoption, domestic violence, human trafficking and sexual
exploitation, and a draft law on juvenile justice is under finalization. Policies,
procedures and minimum standards were developed on alternative care, child justice
and victim protection. In 2007, the Government adopted a national plan of action on
orphans and vulnerable children (OVC) and established national and provincial
multi-sectoral OVC task forces, strengthening child-sensitive impact mitigation
efforts and its partnership with the United Nations and NGOs. A national committee
to lead suppression of human trafficking, smuggling, labour and sexual exploitation
of women and children and an inter-ministerial child justice working group were
established in 2009. The capacities of over 6,100 government social workers, law
enforcement and justice staff were enhanced on child protection, child-friendly and

5

gender-sensitive procedures. Improved protection and reintegration services were
provided to approximately 7,100 child victims of abuse, violence and exploitation. A
combined mine action strategy was developed and the mine action management
information system was strengthened. Mine risk education reached over two million
men, women and children.
Lessons learned
19. The midterm review, conducted in October 2008, concluded that the country
programme was on track against most of the 49 expected outputs. However, the
approach has overemphasized direct accountabilities for quantitative targets, leading
to achievement of the CMDGs and other development goals, at the expense of
qualitative results that facilitate national processes for the advancement of children’s
rights. To an extent, this imbalance has been implicitly addressed in implementation,
with strong emphasis on facilitating national ownership and leadership in a number
of sectors and working to facilitate important reforms, such as subnational
democratic development. It is addressed more formally in this new country
programme design.
20. A number of programmes have developed wider partnerships within sectorwide and other programme-based approaches. These have produced enhanced
results through improved coherence, harmonization and alignment with government led sector strategies. They have also provided opportunities to leverage much
greater resource pools for the benefit of programmes for children. With strong
government commitment to implement the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness,
UNICEF cooperation must continue to demonstrate more consistent, predictable and
productive partnerships in sector policy dialogue and systems strengthening.
21. The focus-province approach adopted in the current country programme,
covering six of Cambodia’s 24 provinces, was successful in garnering field
experience and conducting pilots that have positively impacted national policy.
However, an internal analysis found that higher levels of vulnerability were mostly
found in provinces other than those selected. Moreover, pockets of acute poverty,
vulnerability and disparity occur throughout the country at levels below that of the
province, and further analysis found many instances wh ere the benefits of UNICEF
support have been limited to these focus provinces. The historical presence of
UNICEF programme staff in provincial government offices has also led to a degree
of capacity substitution. It is thus time to move on from this approa ch to one of
addressing the plight of vulnerable children on a nationwide basis, focusing on real
geographic and other areas of disparity and leveraging productive partnerships to
greater scale and effect.

6

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Maternal, newborn and child health and nutrition

5 500

19 000

24 500

Water, sanitation and hygiene

2 500

10 000

12 500

Basic education

5 000

15 000

20 000

Child protection

3 500

15 000

18 500

Local governance for child rights

5 000

10 000

15 000

Policy, advocacy and communication

5 500

5 000

10 500

Cross-sectoral costs

5 530

1 000

6 530

32 530

75 000

107 530

Total

Preparation process
22. Country programme preparation, led by the Ministry of Planning in
coordination with the Council for the Development of Cambodia, built on
recommendations from the midterm review, as well as issues identified by the
situation analysis, and was guided by the simultaneous elaboration of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2011 -2015. This included
analysis of the comparative advantage of United Nations agencies, a gender
evaluation of the current UNDAF and the common country assessme nt.
Consultations were held during the process with civil society, development partners
and the United Nations youth advisory panel.
Programme components results and strategies
23. The overall purpose of this country programme is to advance the realiza tion of
children’s rights by contributing to accelerated progress towards achievement of the
CMDGs, with equity. Programme component results are presented below.
Intermediate results will be further defined in workplans allowing for flexible focus
and adaptation to emerging opportunities throughout the five -year cycle.
24. The country programme reflects UNICEF-specific contributions to sector
strategies, strengthening subnational capacities, and individual, family and
community practices. The programme will contribute to development of a childfocused social protection system and strengthening of policy and governance for
children. Gender and other equity issues will be addressed on a nationwide basis
across sectors and populations.
25. The programme seeks to strengthen service delivery primarily through
leverage of policy and partnerships focused on achievement of agreed results,
demonstrating how systems work for children, facilitating participation and
empowerment, and nurturing national ownership and mutual accountability. Support
to capacity development, based on analyses of capacity gaps, will be central to the
programme: people’s capacity to articulate and claim their rights; national and
subnational government capacity to respect, protect and fulfil ri ghts; and civil
society’s capacity to facilitate enhanced participation and accountability.

7

26. Reflecting the nationwide character of the country programme but maintaining
a UNICEF presence on the ground, a feature much valued by both government and
development partners, it is proposed to relocate staff positions presently assigned to
six focus provinces to five zone offices in Battambang, Kampong Cham, Phnom
Penh, Preah Sihanouk and Siem Reap.
27. Across the country programme, regular resources will be used for advocacy,
core capacity development, assurance of critical UNICEF staff functions and for
strengthening sector partnerships, including contributions to pooled funding
mechanisms. Other resources will allow for expanded capacity development,
operational research and extended staff deployment.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
28. The country programme is fully aligned with the CMDGs and the National
Strategic Development Plan (NSDP), 2009-2013, as well as with relevant sector
plans and major national reform programmes. The Government requested the United
Nations system to prepare an UNDAF covering 2011-2015, so that its midterm
review would coincide with formulation of the new NSDP, and signed the UNDAF
on 26 January 2010. This programme reflects UNICEF contribution to four of the
five UNDAF outcome areas: health and education, gender, governance, and social
protection.
Relationship to international priorities
29. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, to which Cambodia acceded in 1992 and which is enshrined in the
Constitution, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, and other human rights treaties. Objectives and strategic approaches
are consistent with the Millennium Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals
and with the Government’s commitment to the principles of the Paris Declaration on
Aid Effectiveness.
30. Programme component results correspond to all five focus areas of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013.
Programme components
31. Maternal, newborn and child health and nutrition. This programme
component will contribute to the Second Health Sector Support Programme,
supporting national and subnational capacity to achieve Goals 1, 4, 5 and 6 through
an enhanced policy environment, increased coverage of an integrated package of
services, and improved practices by individuals, families and communities.
Programme component results are the following:
(a) Improved national and subnational capacity to increase availability,
accessibility and utilization of quality maternal, newborn and child health services.
To address the high burden of maternal and newborn deaths, this component will
support improvements in antenatal, delivery and postpartum care at facility level
and roll out community care of mothers and newborns. Major child survival
activities include support to new vaccines introduction, strengthening of pneumonia
case management and expansion of diarrhoea treatment with zinc.

8

(b) Increased coverage of evidence-based nutrition interventions to prevent
and treat malnutrition in women of reproductive age and children under five. This
component will promote optimal infant and young child feeding practices,
emphasizing adequate complementary feeding while continuing breastfeeding
promotion. A national system for management of acute malnutrition will be
established. Prevention of anaemia and other micronutrient deficiencies in children
and women will be addressed through multiple micronutrient supplementation and
fortification.
(c) Strengthened multidisciplinary health sector response in HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support services to women and children. This component will
support expansion of prevention of parent-to-child transmission in line with national
targets and improved quality of care for children living with HIV. This will include
expanded counselling of male partners of identified HIV-positive women.
32. Underpinning pursuit of these results, principally in partnership with the
Second Health Sector Support Programme, UNICEF will support improved sector strategic and operational planning, community participation, appropriate
decentralization and deconcentration of functions, and emergency preparedness and
response.
33. Programme coordination will be assured through existing technical working
groups (TWGs) established by the Government: TWG Health, led by the Ministry of
Health, co-facilitated by the World Health Organization; TWG Food Security and
Nutrition, led by the Council for Agriculture and Rural Development, co -facilitated
by the World Food Programme; and TWG HIV/AIDS, led by the National AIDS
Authority, co-facilitated by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). In addition to UNICEF, partners in the Second Health
Sector Support Programme include Agence Française de Développement, Australian
Agency for International Development, Belgian Technical Cooperation, United
Kingdom Department for International Development, the Unite d Nations Population
Fund and the World Bank.
34. Water, sanitation and hygiene. The component will support the national
strategy for rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene (RWSSH), with emphasis on
the unreached among rural communities. It will operat e within government schemes
and seek to leverage these and other resources to scale up decentralized WASH
approaches. Programme component results are:
(a) Communities practise key hygiene behaviours. Building on experience
and lessons learned from the community-led total sanitation and participatory
hygiene approaches and advocacy with CCWCs, this component will promote hand
washing with soap, using toilets and drinking safe water.
(b) Communities, schools and health centres have access to sustainable
technologies for safe water, sanitation and hygiene. This component will promote
water safety planning, community-based water quality monitoring and maintenance,
and household water treatment. It will support improved access to water, sanitation
and hygiene facilities for schools and health centres, particularly those utilized by
vulnerable groups, as well as settlements in remote and disaster-prone areas.
(c) The Ministry of Rural Development and concerned subnational
government agencies are able to lead, coordinate, facilitate, monitor and evaluate
the national strategies on RWSSH and arsenic mitigation. Together with partners,

9

this component will support capacity development, including climate risk
assessments, advocate an increase in resources for the WASH sector, and facilitate
development of a sector programme-based approach.
35. Programme coordination will be assured through the TWG RWSSH, led by the
Ministry of Rural Development and co-facilitated by the World Bank. Other major
partners include the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports, the Asian Development Bank and local and international NGOs.
36. Basic education. The component will contribute to the education strategic
plan (ESP), focusing on vulnerable groups to reduce disp arities with regard to
developmental readiness for right-age entry into school, survival through last
primary grade and transition to lower secondary education. Programme component
results are:
(a) Early childhood education (ECE) professionals at national and
subnational levels are able to plan, coordinate and guide the provision of high quality ECE programmes. Building on successful pilots, this component will scale
up early learning for girls and boys aged below six years, including children with
disabilities and ethnic minorities, and their transition to primary schooling.
(b) Strengthened capacities at national and subnational levels to deliver
inclusive basic education services. This component addresses survival through
primary school and transition into lower secondary school, increasing chances of all
children to complete the full nine-year cycle of basic education. Further support to
the CFS master plan will be provided to government training and monitoring teams
at district level to create support networks and environments conducive to teacher
development, with increased focus on community engagement.
(c) Strengthened capacities at national and subnational levels to plan and
manage implementation of the ESP. This component will support institutiona l and
individual capacity development for strategic and evidence -based planning at
national and subnational levels, including local governance, with a view to long term sustainability of the education system built on equity.
37. Programme coordination will be assured through the TWG Education, led by
the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports, co-facilitated by UNICEF. UNICEF
support will be combined with that of the European Union and the Swedish
International Development Agency through a programme -based approach, with
strong collaboration of the World Bank and UNESCO.
38. Child protection. The component will focus on strengthening systems to
protect vulnerable girls, boys, women and families, including children with
disabilities and those affected by AIDS, and will address social norms to enhance
the protective role of families and communities. Programme component results are:
(a) A child- and gender-sensitive social welfare system is well advanced
towards delivery of increasingly accessible services for vulnerable children and
families. This component will strengthen core functions of the Ministry of Social
Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation to regulate, oversee and monitor child
welfare.
(b) A child and gender-sensitive justice system for children in contact with
the law that complies with international standards is well advanced and increasingly
accessed by children. This component will strengthen law enforcement, judicial and

10

social welfare institutions at national and provincial levels to effe ctively collaborate
to deliver and monitor integrated services for children in contact with the law,
including access to legal aid, social services, and expanded community-based and
other diversion measures.
(c) Communities, families and at-risk children have protective knowledge
and skills that reduce their vulnerability and stigmatization. This component will
work to establish subnational structures and mechanisms of service coordination,
delivery and referral for vulnerable children and families. Eviden ce from innovative
models will inform strategic communication to counter violence, abuse and
stigmatization.
39. Programme coordination will be assured through existing mechanisms
established by the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilita tion, the
Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior, including the national OVC task
force. Strong collaboration will be maintained with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and local and international NGOs.
40. Local governance for child rights. This component, known under the name
Seth Koma, supports the ten-year National Programme for Sub-national Democratic
Development, 2010-2019, which aims to provide more responsive and accountable
services to the people through decentralized governance structures and
deconcentrated functions of line ministries. Programme component results are:
(a) Women and child consultative committees (WCCCs) are able to
influence development plans and budgets so that they are evidence -based, child- and
gender-sensitive and linked to sector policies. This component will seek to expand
successful capacity development of CCWCs both laterally in scaling up nationwide
and vertically to the new WCCCs at district and province levels.
(b) Subnational government and communities have the means and capacity
to monitor and partner with service providers to minimize risk, vulnerability and
poverty. This component will seek to take to nationwide scale combined
vulnerability mapping by local councils and service providers, such as health centres
and schools, with a view to enhance social protection measures at the local level.
(c) The National Committee on Sub-national Democratic Development
(NCDD) and line ministries utilize the experience and lessons learne d from
subnational governments on modelling functions to inform their decision -making on
the assignment of functions. This component will facilitate dialogue and operational
research among the NCDD secretariat and social sector ministries to help common
planning of devolution of functions to lower levels of government.
41. Programme coordination will be assured through the NCDD and the TWG
Decentralization and Deconcentration, led by the Ministry of Interior, co -facilitated
by the World Bank and UNICEF (for the United Nations system).
42. Policy, advocacy and communication. The component will contribute to
strengthened national systems of analysis and planning across sectors, leading
notably to the creation of a comprehensive package of social protection me asures
for the poorest families and children. This will also be the locus for attention to
significant cross-cutting issues, such as gender and adolescence. Programme
component results are:
(a) National and subnational government and partners engage in qu ality
research and analysis, together with rights-holders, leading to evidence-based policy
making and reforms. This component will focus on capture of evidence from field

11

experience and its packaging, both to influence policy and planning and to promote
appropriate knowledge, attitudes and behaviour.
(b) National policy dialogue and formulation in the areas relevant to
children’s rights are based on policy impact and budget analysis and backed by
adequate resources. This component will support country-led monitoring, research
and evaluation in the areas noted above, to inform strategic decision -making, and
periodic analysis of the situation of children and women’s rights.
43. Programme coordination will be assured through the TWG Planning and
Poverty Reduction, led by the Ministry of Planning, co-facilitated by the United
Nations Resident Coordinator’s office and the World Bank, and the interim TWG on
Safety Nets and Social Protection.
44. Cross-sectoral costs will provide operational support to overall coordination
and management of the country programme in the country office and zone offices.
Major partnerships
45. Multi-stakeholder partnership arrangements will be utilized to the maximum
extent. Partnership is one of the major strategic elements of th is country programme,
and partnerships within each of the programme components have been specified
above, conducted to the maximum extent through government -led technical working
groups.
46. In the current cycle, the country programme benefited from fundin g
contributions of Governments and/or the UNICEF national committees of Australia,
Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America, as well as the European Union.
UNICEF will seek to maintain and expand on these partnerships.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
47. The Ministry of Planning will assume overall coordination of the country
programme, delegating to line ministries the coordination of programme
components. Under leadership of the Council for the Development of Cambodia,
joint UNDAF annual reviews will allow for adjustments, as needed, in particular to
intermediate results that will be further agreed with partners. The National Institute
of Statistics maintains the national socio-economic database (CamInfo), tracking
progress towards targets of the NSDP, the CMDGs and the UNDAF. An UNDAF
midpoint evaluation is planned for 2013, coinciding with formulation of the new
NSDP.
48. To the extent possible, monitoring and review of the country programme will
be conducted through UNDAF processes. Planned programme component or
regional/thematic evaluations will be presented in the integrated mo nitoring and
evaluation plan.

12

