Republic of Cameroon
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for the Republic of
Cameroon (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.35) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2012 second regular
session (11-14 September 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final version
was approved at the 2013 first regular session of the Executive
Board on 8 February 2013.

Basic data †
(2010, unless otherwise stated)
Child population (millions, under 18 years)

9.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

136
15 a
7/20, ../..

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2011)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/wealthiest)

690 b

Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births, adjusted)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2009)

97/86

Survival rate up to the last year of primary education (%, m/f, 2008)

69

Use of improved water resources (%)

77

Use of improved sanitary services (%)

49

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years old, male/female, 2009)

5.3

Child work (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female, 2006)

31

Birth registration (%, children under 5, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/wealthiest)

70
71/69, 86/58, 51/91

Per capita GNI (US$)

†
a
b

1 160

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

84

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

79

Additional data on children and women are also available at www.childinfo.org.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
The reported estimate of 669 deaths per 100,000 live births (1998 -2004) is provided in the 2004
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS).
The United Nations Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank) produces internationally
comparable sets of maternal mortality data, adjusted for the well-documented problems of under-reporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths, and provides estimates for countries lacking such data. Internationally
comparable datasets on maternal mortality for 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010 are available at
http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
In 2007, monetary poverty in Cameroon affected 40 per cent of the population
and 46 per cent of persons under 18. Between 2001 and 2007, the number of poor
children increased from 3.6 to 4.1 million. There is a wide gap between urban and
rural children regarding the incidence of poverty (16 and 60 per cent, respectively).
The Adamawa, East, North and Far North regions of the country account for 60 per
cent of poor children. Child poverty constitutes a stigma which prevents children
from asserting themselves and impedes the protection and realization of their rights.
Certain social practices (early marriage, early pregnancy, and rejection of health
workers of the opposite sex) continue to have a negative impact on maternal and
child health, with the concomitant effects of a low level of assisted childbirths (64
per cent in 2011), insufficient care for obstetric complications (16 per cent) and high
maternal mortality rate, estimated in 2010 at 690 deaths per 1,000 live births.

2

2.
Although still high, the infant and child mortality rate per 1,000 live births
decreased from 146 in 2001 to 136 in 2006 and 122 in 2011. Achieving the target of
76 per 1,000 live births by 2015 in accordance with Millennium Development Goal
(MDG) 4 seems unlikely.
3.
According to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and the Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) of 2011, chronic malnutrition affects 33 per cent of
children, and nearly half of those children (14 per cent) in a severe form. The
stunting rate increases fast with age, amounting to 12 per cent for infants under 8
months and 17 per cent for 9 to 11-month-olds, then rising steadily to peak at 42 per
cent for 18 to 23-month and 24 to 35-month-olds. The nutritional situation displays
considerable urban-rural and gender disparities. The chronic malnutrition level is
slightly higher among boys (35 per cent) than girls (30 p er cent), while stunting
affects 41 per cent of rural and 22 per cent of urban children. The nutritional status
strongly affects infant and child mortality and is related to moderate or severe
underweight affecting 14.6 per cent of the children in 2011. Th at situation is
compounded by an increase in the rate of infantile morbidity due to diarrhoeal
diseases from 19 per cent in 2006 to 21 per cent in 2011, and by the recurrence of
cholera which, in three years, claimed more than 34,000 victims, caused 1,500
deaths and plunged the country into an emergency situation.
4.
There has been modest progress with regard to immunization, as coverage for
all antigens increased from 48 per cent in 2004 to 53 per cent in 2011, or by less
than 1 per cent per year.
5.
Maternal mortality continues to give grounds for concern. Maternal deaths are
mainly due to remoteness from health services and to the low purchasing power of
the population in general and women in particular. In the rural areas, 57 per cent of
women aged 20-24 have stated that they had married while still under 18. In certain
regions, women may not visit a medical facility on their own.
6.
HIV/AIDS prevalence among persons aged 15-49, estimated at 5.3 per cent in
2004, was 4.3 per cent in 2011 (2.9 per cent of men and 5.6 per cent of women).
Cameroon thus still belongs to the category of generalized epidemic countries. Of
the approximately 560,300 persons living with HIV/AIDS, 55.8 per cent are women
and 8.5 per cent children under 14. Prevalence among pregnant women is high (7.6
per cent). The number of orphans and vulnerable children (OVCs) increased from
183,500 in 2008 to 304,000 in 2010.
7.
In 2010, the gross rate of access to pre-school education was 27.2 per cent and
displayed wide geographic disparities. It was lowest among ethnic minorities and
refugees and in the northern part of the country, namely the Far North, North and
Adamawa regions, where it attained, respectively, 3.6, 6.3 and 10.6 per cent. The net
primary school enrolment ratio was 88 per cent, namely 92 per cent among boys and
83 per cent among girls. The primary level completion rate is increasing and has
reached 73 per cent.
8.
The rate of working children was, in 2007, 32 per cent of those aged 5 -14 and,
in 2010, 39.7 per cent of those aged 10-17. The birth registration rate is expected to
rise as a result of the recent extension of the time limit for such registration free of
charge from 30 to 90 days. Of the 800 children detained in 2011, 80 per cent were
held for minor offences. In its latest report, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child regrets that the process of adoption of the draft Code on the protection of

3

children and the draft Code of the person and the family is slow, and that various
adopted acts are inadequately implemented.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
9.
The 2008-2012 programme supported the formulation of: (a) national plans for
combating child exploitation and trafficking, reducing mother-to-child HIV/AIDS
transmission, and scaling up mother-to-child transmission prevention; and (b) the
strategic plan for OVC care, 2010-2012, and of the national policy for the integrated
development of young children. The programme contributed to the development of
other documents for action, including the health sector strategy. Various studies,
surveys and evaluations produced factual input to the Educational Management
Information System (EMIS); to two databases, accessible online, which concern
social policies and the MDG monitoring indicators; and to strategic debates during
the national forum on the vulnerability of children and social protection.
10. The DPT3 vaccine coverage rate has been stagnating, at 82 per cent in 2007,
84 per cent in 2010 (Joint Reporting Form) and 82 per cent in 2011. The number of
children under 5 sleeping under an impregnated mosquito net is was only 13 per
cent in 2006 (MICS 2006) and 21 per cent in 2011 (DHS MICS 2011), compared to
the national target of 80 per cent. A national campaign fo r the distribution of longlasting impregnated mosquito nets (LLINs) has been in progress since 2011.
UNICEF provides mosquito nets and informs the population on their effective use.
Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) is implemented in 267 villages, of which
131 have been certified “No more outdoors defecation”. The adoption of CLTS by
other development partners contributes to scaling up that process. The programme
supported such prevention and response activities against cholera epidemic as water
purification to make it drinkable, disinfection of contaminated areas and provision
of relevant information to the population, in addition to the preparation, in 2011, of
the water and sanitation component of the national contingency plan against cholera.
11. Since the start of the programme cycle, nutrition counselling coverage has
increased from 6 to 40 health districts, with the focus on the northern areas. The
capacities of providers of such services and of community relays were considerably
enhanced as regards community care for acute malnutrition and basic nutritional
support in relevant in-patient and day-patient treatment centres. Although the rate of
anaemia among children and women is still high (60 and 40 per cent, respectively,
in 2011), stepped-up nutritional action has contributed to reducing that rate. Since
2008, children under 5 have been receiving vitamin A and de -worming twice a year.
Currently, refined vegetable oil is enriched with vitamin A and wheat flour is
enriched with iron, zinc, folic acid and vitamin B12.
12. With regard to HIV/AIDS, the rate of women examined during pregnancy and
accepting a screening test increased from 77 per cent in 2007 to 82 per cent in 2010;
and the rate of seropositive pregnant women under preventive antiretrovir al (ARV)
treatment increased from 46.6 per cent in 2008 to 56.7 per cent in 2010. The number
of health-care training activities covering the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT) has practically doubled, increasing from 1,327 in 2007 to

4

2,067 in 2010. The number of infected children under ARV treatment increased from
2,450 in 2008 to 4,440 in 2011 but that figure accounts for only approximately 9.1 per
cent of children in need of such treatment. Prevalence among persons aged 20 -24
decreased from 5.4 per cent in 2004 to 2.2 per cent in 2011. In 2010, care was
secured for approximately 25 per cent of the 304,210 OVCs.
13. The programme contributed to improving the net school enrolment ratio by
promoting the enrolment of girls through scholarships and advocacy for greater
community involvement. In view of the low rate of access to pre -school education
(12.68 per cent in the priority education zones (ZEPs)) and the significant drop -out
rate (given a 55.75 per cent completion rate in the ZEPs), variou s alternative ways
of encouraging preparation for primary education and educational rehabilitation
were tested under the programme. The first of those goals is pursued by helping
children having lacked access to a preschool establishment to develop the
capabilities necessary for adaptation to primary school. The second is pursued by
helping children having dropped out to make up and join their class. Parental
education is instrumental in furthering community involvement and the ownership,
expansion and sustainability of initiatives, particularly those promoting school
enrolment among vulnerable girls, refugees, children with disabilities, and ethnic
minorities.
14. Advocacy and capacity-building brought about an environment offering better
protection for children. In that connection, the civil status reform led to the delivery
of 12,350 birth certificates, the reduction of the average duration of detention on
remand of minors from 8 to 3 months in the Douala jurisdictions, and the creation of
sections or cells for minors in 59 of the country’s 75 prisons. Evaluations of action
related to the children’s parliament, juvenile justice and birth registration, and the
study on alternatives to detention, helped to improve the legal framework through,
in particular, the extension of time limits for birth registration, the enhancement of
measures alternative to detention in the Criminal Code (currently under revision)
and the creation of a rehabilitation centre for minors in conflict with the law. The
National Plan for Combating Human Trafficking, the Code on the protection of
children and the Code of the person and the family are under discussion.

Lessons learned
15. Cameroon is a lower-middle-income country, in which UNICEF implements,
in addition to the regular programme, an emergency programme (against, inter alia,
cholera, malnutrition, polio and measles) in approximately one half of the territory
with insufficient resources. The State’s participation in the response to recurring
emergencies is limited, although the national budget for development is largely
financed with internal resources. Despite the Government’s efforts, governance
problems impede the attainment of significant results regarding basic services
accessibility and quality. The new programme must focus on mechanisms, capacities
and funding for enhancing preparedness and response to the emergencies in question.
16. The failure of the information systems to compile disaggregated data prevents
effective measurement of the effectiveness and fairness o f the activities carried out,
and therefore reduces the capability to identify and quantify priority actions in
support of children and disadvantaged groups. The new programme must focus on
strengthening the systems designed to monitor equity. In basic edu cation, the

5

implementation of SIGE is already improving the situation and will contribute to the
integration of programme components.
17. Since 2010, as part of effective decentralization, budgetary resources have
been transferred to the communities in order to enhance the supply and quality of
basic social services. Under the 2013-2017 programme, it is planned to build on that
positive development through a strategy using community-based approaches to
improve access to services and by strengthening local monitoring mechanisms in
order to eliminate bottlenecks.
18. In order to enhance the equity of programme initiatives and to meet the needs
of particularly disadvantaged children in the poorest regions (in the north and east
of the country), the midterm review refocused programme action on four regions out
of six with regard to basic education, and on 30 health districts out of 62 with regard to
the supply of 4P 1 services. That focus will be consolidated in order to ensure better
integration of the activities of programme components as a whole and to give priority to
the Sahel region, where the social and economic indicators are at their lowest.

Country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Young child survival

7 093

22 438

29 531

Basic education

6 400

10 020

16 420

HIV and AIDS

6 410

12 700

19 100

Child protection

3 672

2 520

6 192

Social policy and planning

3 000

42

3 042

Intersectoral component

5 250

0

5 250

31 825

47 710

79 535

Total

Preparation process
19. The country programme has been developed through a participatory process
involving the Government partners; and reflects the Growth and Employment
Strategy Paper (GESP), 2010-2020, and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF), 2008-2012. The above process ensured the programme’s
alignment with the national priorities and the comparative advantages of the United
Nations system, set forth in UNDAF, 2013-2017.
20. The relevant discussions were guided by, inter alia, an analysis of situation, the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the 2010 midterm
review and other evaluations. Under the authority of the Ministry of Planning, the
first version was presented to all key partners for consideration and amendments.
__________________
1

6

The 4P programme consists in: prevention of mother-to-child HIV/AIDS transmission, paediatric
care, OVC protection, and prevention of HIV/AIDS among young persons.

Results and strategies of the programme components
21. The programme aims at accelerating progress towards the attainment of the
MDGs constituting GESP and UNDAF priorities, with emphasis on the survival,
development and comprehensive protection of children, particularly those most
vulnerable.
22.

The programme will make it possible to achieve the following main results:

(a) Activities having a major impact on health, nutrition, water and
sanitation selected, placed in context (at the strategic level) and then implemented
(at the operational level) in order to help to reduce mortality and morbidity among
children under 5, pregnant women and nursing mothers;
(b) Percentage of vulnerable pre-school children, girls in particular, who
have access to quality basic education, increased in the ZEPs;
(c) Children, adolescents and their parents protected against HIV/AIDS and
receiving comprehensive care on an equitable basis in the health districts in which
the programme is implemented;
(d) The system for the protection of children against abuse, violence and
exploitation strengthened, and access to citizenship and legal services enhanced;
(e) A social protection base and equity with regard to those most vulnerable,
particularly children and women, provided for under national and sectoral policies.
23. These results will be achieved through a set of strategies, the most important
of which are: ownership of the initiatives by the actors, an d sustained local presence
in the zones and pockets of vulnerability or inequity; building national capacities for
addressing the children’s interests more effectively in the framework of public and
budgetary policies; strategic partnership with the instit utions supporting
decentralization and good governance through the involvement of civil society and
the private sector, in order to improve the quality and accessibility of services by
building technical capacities for supplying services to the most vulner able;
intersectoral integration and action which, over and above UNICEF programme
components, will strengthen coordination mechanisms within UNDAF; results based funding in cooperation with other partners, particularly the World Bank; and a
community-based approach focused on the implementation of innovative strategies
and targeted communication to encourage changes to social practices unfavourable
to children.
24. All of the programme’s strategic and managerial choices are guided by the five
programming principles of the United Nations (gender, results-based management,
human rights approach, capacity development and environmental sustainability).
Prevention of and response to emergencies, particularly the food crisis and rampant
cholera almost endemic in the north of the country, will be underscored.
25. Of the programme’s five components, one (social policy and planning) is
cross-cutting. The programme is country-wide and is focused on the most
disadvantaged regions.
26. Young child survival. This component comprises the following three
subcomponents: health; food; and water, sanitation and hygiene.

7

27. The health subcomponent aims at broadening coverage for activities with a
significant impact on maternal and child health. At the strategic level, the
programme will contribute to preparing and reviewing the relevant policy and
strategy documents and promoting the most vulnerable persons’ access to care (inter
alia, free of charge). At the operational level, the poorest communities will be
targeted by a set of activities including the expanded programme of immunization;
community-based care for malaria, diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections; and
the promotion of essential family practices. Care providers will benefit from
capacity-building and enhanced follow-up and supervision.
28. The food subcomponent aims at scaling up the prevention of malnutrition and
improving the nutritional status of children aged up to 59 months, pregnant women
and nursing mothers. Activities designed to reduce chronic malnutriti on and
micronutrient deficiencies will be strengthened through the encouragement of
exclusive breastfeeding, promotion of adequate nutrition practices for young
children, and food fortification. Quality control of fortified foods will be improved
and community-based care in acute malnutrition cases will be scaled up. At the
strategic level, nutrition-related advocacy will be strengthened.
29. The water, sanitation and hygiene subcomponent will focus on activities
related to emergencies, access to drinking water, basic sanitation for vulnerable
population groups, and the implementation of strategic documents underscoring
good practices regarding communication for development. Activities for the
promotion of CLTS and hand-washing with soap will be further pursued, targeting
mainly the areas where outdoor defecation is particularly widespread.
30. Basic education. This component will strengthen and expand the “network”
approach conducive to pooling resources and experience and building the capacities
of key actors in the current ZEPs and the other areas with a lagging school enrolment
ratio. The main activities will focus on access to schools (including pre -school
establishments), reduction of gender inequalities, and the quality and relevance of
education. Sanitation in schools will be improved through the construction of
latrines and water outlets and the promotion of hygiene. Support for such activities
in favour of vulnerable children, including children of ethnic minorities and
refugees will be sought by strengthening SIGE and parental education. Such
education, particularly fathers’ involvement, will be crucial to raising awareness in
the communities and convincing them to accept an accelerated study programme for
primary school entry and the educational rehabilitation of children who dropped out.
31. HIV and AIDS. This component aims at accelerating progress towards the
elimination of mother-to-child HIV/AIDS transmission by 2017 through full
development of PMTCT, paediatric care and the promotion of the 4P objectives as
strategic pillars of the programme. Accordingly, in addition to PMTCT, primary
prevention among adolescents and young persons and the reinforcement of OVC care
policies will be scaled up with a view to synergy. The 4P objectives will be implemented
through high-impact activities based on factual data and equity considerations.
32. Child protection. This component will contribute to strengthening the
protection system in order to improve the most vulnerable persons’ access to
services and to prevent abuse, violence and exploitation. The component provides
for the development of a national child-protection strategy and for support for
appropriate civil status and juvenile justice reforms. A community-based approach
focused on the promotion of changes to social practices detrimental to children’s

8

rights will be implemented. The development of a national system of information on
vulnerable children and families, the dissemination of juvenile justice standards and
procedures involving forms of placement alternative to imprisonment, and relevant
capacity-building will be conducive to a protective environment for children.
33. Social policy and planning. This component aims at strengthening advocacy
of public policies and resource allocations taking children’s rights into account.
Emphasis will be placed on social protection with a view to reducing inequities. The
country’s internal resources suffice for the required investment, particularly in
social safety nets. The programme, in cooperation with the Wo rld Bank, the
International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Food Programme (WFP), already supports the
establishment of a national social protection base. The component will also support,
at the national level, the development of a social protection strategy focused on the
child and on gender issues and, at the local level, the inclusion of the needs of the
most vulnerable population groups in community development projects.
34. Data collection and analysis will enhance the factual information available,
political advocacy and strategic planning for the implementation of programme
activities. Sustained microplanning will take place at the decentralized level. The
development of monitoring and evaluation capacities are expected to improve the
availability of disaggregated data on the situation of children and women, particularly
those most vulnerable, and to support systems for monitoring results at the central and
decentralized levels in order to identify, observe and eliminate bottlenecks which
diminish the impact and equity of the activities carried out. Approximately 10 per cent
of programme resources will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation support.
35. Intersectoral component. This component will handle the financing of
operational costs (logistic, storage and operating expenses) and staff engaged in
cross-cutting activities.
Relation with national priorities and the UNDAF
36. The national development priorities are defined in GESP, 2010 -2020, and in
the sectoral development strategies. Discussions between the Government and the
United Nations system made it possible to specify by consensus three key areas of
UNDAF results (strong, sustainable and inclusive growth; employment; and
governance and strategic management of the State). UNICEF focuses on the
following three of the five UNDAF outcomes:
(a) Outcome 2: Social protection base developed and national social
protection system updated by 2017;
(b) Outcome 3: Access of the population, particularly the most vulnerable
persons and refugees, to health services and quality education enhanced, made
equitable and used by those beneficiaries by 2017;
(c) Outcome 5: Mission of national and local institutions carried out in a
participatory and transparent manner and in compliance with gender equality,
human rights and the rule of law.
37. These three outcomes have been formulated as programme component results
in order to contribute to achieving UNDAF and GESP outcomes, namely access to

9

basic social services, community-based promotion of health, and social protection of
the most vulnerable persons.
Relation with international priorities
38. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Programme objectives and strategies aim at ensuring that vulnerable
children’s needs are taken into consideration directly and indirectly and at
accelerating progress towards the attainment of the MDGs.
39. Moreover, through its contribution to UNDAF outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 5, the
programme reflects the priorities of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 20062013. The implementation of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT)
will make it possible to reinforce respect for the principles of the Paris Declaration.
Major partnerships
40. The programme will pursue advocacy activities to ensure that UNICEF, WFP,
ILO, WHO, UNDP and the World Bank jointly support the Government in
implementing the national social protection base; and will mobilize UNFPA, the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the World Bank to provide
joint financial and technical support for the funding of the fifth combined DHS/MICS
survey, designed to produce indicators for measuring progress towards the attainment of
the MDGs. Moreover, within the framework of the implementation of the joint
operational plan concluded in 2011, UNICEF, WHO, UNFPA, the World Bank and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) will step up their partnership
as part of the campaign for the accelerated reduction of maternal mortality.
41. At the local level, increased cooperation with the private sector is expected to
encourage the effective involvement of businesses in the provision of services in
support of children. UNICEF will form partnerships with the main actors of
decentralization, particularly the Special Inter-communal Infrastructure and Intervention
Fund, the National Programme for Participatory Development and the Association of
United Councils and Cities of Cameroon in order to ensure the inclusion of programmes
promoting the rights of children in the community development projects.
Programme monitoring, evaluation and management
42. Under the direction of the Ministry of the Economy, Planning and Regional
Development the Government and UNICEF are jointly responsible for programme
management, monitoring and evaluation. To that end, they will use the situation
analyses drawn up periodically on the basis of reliable and disaggregated data; followup information on the implementation of activities on the ground; key indicators
linked to the matrix of programme results; sector reviews; and evaluations carried
out or supported by the programme as part of the comprehensive monitoring and
evaluation plan, 2013-2017. A rolling biannual workplan will be developed for
every programme component in cooperation with the Government and the other
partners; and will serve as a reference framework for biannual and annu al reviews.
43. A midterm review will be organized in 2015. In 2016 and 2017, a combined
country-wide EDS/MICS survey based on a representative sample of households
will provide a basis for an overall assessment of the programme.

10

