Cape Verde
Common country programme document
2012-2016

The draft common country programme document for Cape
Verde (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2011/CPV/1) was presented to
the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2011
second regular session (12-15 September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Contents
I.

Situation analysis ................................................................................................................................... 3

II.

Past cooperation and lessons learned ..................................................................................................... 5

III.

Proposed programme ............................................................................................................................. 6

IV.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation ............................................................................ 8

Annexes
I.

UNDP results and resources framework for Cape Verde, 2012-2016 .................................................. 10

II.

UNFPA results and resources framework for Cape Verde, 2012-2016 ............................................... 12

III.

UNICEF summary results matrix, 2012-2016, including the indicative budget .................................. 15

2

I.

Situation analysis
1. Natural resource-poor Cape Verde, a small insular nation, made up of 4,033 square
kilometres of mostly barren volcanic rock, took a courageous step when it in 2008 graduated
from least developed country (LDC) status, the second country in the world to do so. The
total resident population is 491,875 inhabitants, 54 per cent of whom are under 24. Annual
population growth is 1.2 per cent according to the 2010 census, the first fully digital census
in Africa. The Cape Verdean diaspora is at least as large as the resident population. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) targets by
2015, particularly with regards to education and health, and many of its development
indicators stand out as exceptions for the region. The overall quality of its human resources
has transformed the country into an emerging provider of expertise in different countries of
the region, particularly but not exclusively lusophone, on issues ranging from e-governance
and e-census, to civil protection and emergency response.
2. Real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita grew from $902 in 1990 to $3,206 in
2008, while poverty rates fell from 49 per cent in 1990 to 27 per cent in 2007. Infant
mortality rates decreased from 57.9 per thousand in 1995 to 20.1 in 2009. The number of
attended births increased from 55 per cent in 1998 to 87 per cent in 2007, and life
expectancy at birth was estimated in 2010 at 77 years for women and 69 years for
men.Significant progress has also been made in the overall contraceptive prevalence rate: the
proportion of women of reproductive age who were using (or whose partner was using) a
modern contraceptive method in 2005 was 44 per cent, significantly higher than regional
averages.
3. More than 80 per cent of the population has access to electricity and 63 per cent to
sanitation facilities. In the health sector, significant investments were made in human
resource development. The doctor and nurse ratio for 10,000 habitants increased respectively
from 3.9 and 8.5 in 2003 to 4.9 and 9.8 in 2009, with higher concentrations of qualified
health professionals in the two main urban areas.
4. Important factors that contributed to Cape Verde’s transformation include strong
governance, sound democratic institutions, transparent and participative electoral processes
and a free media, with a high level of participation of women in key governmental and
electoral positions, with parity achieved in the executive branch. The country's ambitious
“transformation agenda” aims to construct a dynamic economy where growth can be
sustained, to strengthen an innovative, competitive and job-creating private sector, and to
reinforce regulatory institutions. Authorities have engaged in a major state reform
programme, aimed at addressing remaining capacity gaps in public administration. This is
also meant to support Cape Verde’s choice to further integrate into the Global economy,
including World Trade Organization (WTO) accession in 2008, and a special partnership
with the European Union the same year.
5. Despite its exceptional progress, Cape Verde is a country in transition, still faced with
economic vulnerabilities associated with its previous LDC status. Two key contributors to
the economy, tourism and remittances, are highly dependent on the overall global financial
climate. The tertiary sector employs the majority of the active working population, and there
is considerable scope to expand and improve productive sectors such as agriculture, which
absorbs only 11 per cent of the total work force.
6. The third critical contributor to the economy, official development assistance (ODA),
has, since Cape Verde’s graduation, been on the rise, as the country has had increasing
access to concessional lending. (This is shown in the 2011 Survey on Monitoring the Paris
Declaration.) ODA is expected to decrease, however, because of financial difficulties of
main partners and the end of the transition period granted by donors at graduation. Given
that the aid environment is evolving increasingly towards lending, and given the uncertain
prospects for increased domestic resources, national ambitions for fast and equitable
3

progress will be under increased pressure in the coming years. In addition, integration into
the global economy clearly demands increasing levels of competitiveness, for which both
public and private capacities need to be further built.
7. Within this context, employment generation remains a key priority for the country,
though both investments in public works and the development of private sector investment
for job creation. Unemployment, currently at 13 per cent, has been an ongoing concern,
particularly as regards youths between 15 and 24, and increasingly with regards to university
graduates. Women are more affected by unemployment than men (25.5% of women are
unemployed compared to 18.3% of men).
8. The informal sector, which employed 18 per cent of the population in 2009, remains the
most important source of new employment. This has implications on several fronts. A recent
survey conducted by the National Institute of Statistics confirmed that those engaged in the
informal sector generate lower revenues, and have less access to both social protection
schemes as well as financial services. It also showed that women make up 52.5 per cent of
the informal sector workers, with revenues estimated to be half of those of the male workers
in the same sector. It is in the informal sector that the majority of the some 16,300 children
at work are to be found, and the government is launching a major initiative to eliminate child
labor.
9. The nationally identified requirement of diversifying the productive base is both mindful
of and constrained by existing environmental challenges, including groundwater scarcity,
recurrent drought, fragile ecological systems and soil erosion, while insularity and climate
change are expected to have serious consequences on what are already sensitive ecosystems,
In addition, the November 2009 dengue fever epidemic, while showing the remarkable
response capacity of the country, did serve as a reminder that, in addition to natural disasters,
the country is also vulnerable to health-related crises.
10. As part of its proactive engagement for integration to the global economy, Cape Verde
is defending an inclusive growth agenda. In line with this commitment, disparities have
become of growing concern to national authorities at various levels. Gender-based
disparities in employment, revenue, social protection, political participation and
representation of women, and as related to gender-based violence were at the basis of the
elaboration of the National Plan for Gender Equality and Equity, and of the National Plan for
Gender based violence, both implemented by the Institute for Gender Equality and Equity
(ICIEG). Both plans were evaluated in 2011, highlighting the need to pursue and consolidate
efforts, particularly taking into account the role of women as primary caregivers for an
important part of the country’s children, notably within the 48% of households headed by
women in 2010 (INE).Bringing the MDGs to All, or a homogeneous attainment of the
MDGs throughout the nation has also earned increasing national attention. As highlighted by
the National MDG report 2010, regional and urban/rural disparities have persisted as regards
to many of the MDG targets and indicators, particularly those relating to poverty and the
social-protection system, and to access to water and sanitation. Fourteen out of 22
municipalities have poverty rates equal or higher than the national average. Although periurban poverty, also associated with violence and urban crime is a reality, poverty remains a
rural phenomenon (44% rural and 13% urban). Regional and other disparities are of
particular relevance for the youth who have, in some instances, unequal access to
employment, to secondary and higher education, to professional training and to employment,
while others are faced with increasing levels of exposure to violence and abuse (including
sexual abuse), delinquency, drug abuse and conflict with the law. Increasing rates of early
pregnancies (21 per cent of 15-19 year old girls in 2008) are also placing adolescent girls at
higher risk of perpetuating cycles of poverty and marginalization. Building on its quite
extraordinary achievements on all socio-economic indicators, Cape Verde is now faced with
the requirement of a qualitative leap, aiming to an irreversibly positive development path
within a complex global financial context. This is also the objective of the state reform
4

process, which aims to consolidate public institutional capacity to promote growth as well as
a more inclusive society, where quality and equity goals need to replace access objectives.

II. Past cooperation and lessons learned
11. The past cooperation cycle (2006-2011) saw two critical changes, both of a particularly
pilot nature: the past programme was one common to all four former Ex-Com agencies:
UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP). This was the first
programme of this kind. It was also part of the creation of the first joint office operation, in
which a single representative, staff and office were to serve jointly the mandates of UNDP,
UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP. Building on this initial breakthrough, Cape Verde was also
included, in 2008, in the eight pilot countries for the Delivering as One (DaO) initiative,
adopting an all-encompassing One UN programme. The preceding common country
programme document (CCPD) was integrated and delivered as part of the One UN
programme. Key results of the 2006-2011 CCPD relate to:
(a) a smooth transition process supported by the “National Transition Strategy” and
“Transition Support Group”, with positive impact on the budget support process and
increased donor use of national systems;
(b) promoting state reform at central and municipal levels through: development of esystems of management, supporting structural changes to increase transparency and rigour,
in a recently introduced budget-support setting;
(c) conducting the electoral census, based on civil registration;
(d) strengthening micro-finance regulation and improvement of entrepreneurship among
vulnerable groups, especially women and youth;
(e) sustained support of the statistical system, notably regarding the conduct of major datacollection operations, including the first fully digital census in Africa;
(f) strengthening conservation and preservation of critical biodiversity and ecosystems;
(g) building adaptive capacity to climate change in the water sector and coastal zones;
(h) enhancing the national civil-protection capacity relating to disaster risk reduction;
(i) contributing to the expansion and quality of services in the health, education, social and
child-protection sectors, through support for reform in these sectors;
(j) promoting better integration in the political agenda of issues related to children,
adolescents and youth, with a more comprehensive inter-sectoral approach and interventions,
and a significant improvement in the legal framework for the rights of children and in the
sexual and reproductive health and rights for adolescents and youth; and
(k) sustained support for the introduction of new vaccines and better integration of
HIV/AIDS in reproductive health programmes.
These achievements have allowed Cape Verde to serve as a good example in key
development areas and to offer technical assistance to some countries in the African region,
e.g., on e-systems and the digital census.
12. The last programme cycle of the four agencies – UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP –
set the stage for better-coordinated interventions and emerging opportunities for better
integration of the assistance provided by each individual agency, building on the common
administrative platform of the joint office. Following the conclusions of the country-led
evaluation of the Delivering as One conducted in 2010, the proposed programme will better
capitalize on the individual agencies’ comparative advantages and expertise, within the
framework of joint and integrated approaches. This is expected to strengthen policy dialogue
and advocacy, thus better supporting the country in critical areas linked to evidence-based
policymaking, planning, monitoring and evaluation. In this regard, the programme should
support a more coherent system for data production and analysis of desegregated statistical
and non-statistical information by age, sex, region and socio-economic characteristics.
13. Regarding the MDGs more generally, and building on partnerships with both central and
local authorities, the issue of disparities in the equitable realization of the MDGs was placed
5

on the agenda of both national and international partners. A call was made for increased and
better targeted investments in the future. This has been particularly effective in the cases of
the water and sanitation targets. In these cases support provided for the elaboration of a
national plan for basic sanitation and for the national plan for the integrated management of
water resources has led to an unprecedented mobilization of resources to address disparities
and inequalities related to access to water and sanitation.
14. On the health front, support for the national vaccination programme, with the inclusion
of new vaccines in the Expanded Vaccination Programme (PEV), and support for the
establishment of national reproductive-health programmes and services, particularly for the
youth, has expanded. The cost has also come to be borne entirely by government budgets.
The proposed new programme cycle builds on the reviews and evaluations of the results
achieved to date, and reflects the changed status of the country. Thus the new programme
better responds to new requirements for: (i) support better tailored to evidence-based
policymaking; (ii) increasingly structured, decentralized support for direct results relating to
local MDGs; (iii) continued close monitoring of the vulnerabilities of the country and the
impacts of its graduation on vulnerable groups; (iv) recognition of the need for better
structured South-South cooperation, enabling Cape Verde to export expertise in the region;
and (vi) improved coordination and creative partnerships with international partners,
particularly budget support partners, building on the relative importance of the United
Nations system as a financial partner to Cape Verde.

III.

Proposed programme
20. The proposed programme, covering the 2012-2016 timeframe, was elaborated following
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for the same period, and
conceived as a contribution to the national priorities defined by the Government programme
for 2012-2016. These are expected to be further defined in the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (DECRP III) to be finalized in 2011 for the same period. Of the seven strategic
priorities outlined in the Government’s programme for the period at hand, the proposed
assistance will directly contribute to the following three: (i) “Build a dynamic, competitive,
innovative, and sustainable economy, with shared prosperity for all”; (ii) “Promote social
development and cohesion, and facilitate access to basic services”; and (iii) “Consolidate
democracy, and good governance”. Taking into account the small size of the country and of
its population, and building on lessons learned from past cooperation, the proposed
programme will move away from pilot initiatives, developing programme-based
interventions aiming at nationwide impact. These will be articulated around three levels of
assistance: (i) support to human rights and gender-based macro-economic policy choices; (ii)
consolidation of institutional (“meso level”) capacities for adequate management of the
country’s multiple transitions; and (iii) development of local and community capacities
(micro) for direct impacts on the improvement of living conditions. The interventions are
intended to benefit essentially children, youth and women of Cape Verde. The programme is
proposed in response to the four pillars identified by the UNDAF, namely: (i) inclusive
growth and poverty reduction; (ii) consolidation of institutions, democracy and citizenship;
(iii) reduction of disparities and promotion of equity; and (iv) environmental sustainability
and climate change adaptation.
Pillar 1: Inclusive growth and poverty reduction
21. Assistance under this pillar will focus on the following three priorities.
(a) Increased economic competitiveness, particularly related to the restructuring of the trade
sector. This work will focus notably on the update and implementation of the Diagnostic
Trade Integration Study (DTIS) prepared by Cape Verde as part of the first integrated
framework, and support capacity development of the private sector, with a specific focus on
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). There will be a view to increasing SMEs
contribution to growth and to the generation of decent employment.

6

(b) Formulation and implementation of evidence-based policies for gender-sensitive and
child-friendly social protection, as well as for sustainable social-sector financing, in light of
mounting pressures on limited domestic resources and a push for cost recovery and
elimination of subsidies.
(c) Identification and implementation of programme and policy options for
poverty/vulnerability monitoring and reduction, with a specific focus on gender-based and
monetary equity, while reducing environmental degradation and enhancing a low-carbon
emission development strategy. Assistance under this axis will mainly take the form of highlevel advisory services, for prospective poverty, vulnerability and equity analyses, reflecting
evolving population dynamics. These studies are to be conducted and then translated into an
inclusive sectoral and macroeconomic policy agenda. High-level technical assistance will
also focus on SMEs, including rural enterprises, supporting capacity development and access
to other support services. The work will also focus on an operational definition of financial
inclusion targets, green production and environmental sustainability. Analyses should also
enable the development of adequate measurement tools and indicators to assess the
contribution of SMEs to employment generation and economic growth.
Pillar 2: Consolidation of institutions, democracy, and citizenship
22. Interventions under this pillar will focus on the following four priorities.
(a) Improved efficiency and efficacy of public administration with a focus on strategic
evidence-based planning and budgeting capacities, as well as on the national monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) system. This effort will particularly involve the health, education
(including preschool), social development, justice, and youth and employment sectors. It
will be carried out in close coordination with the Prime Minister’s office in charge of
state reform, and the finance and planning ministry. As part of Paris Declaration
implementation, support will also be provided to the Ministry of External Affairs in
setting up and operationalizing aid-efficiency mechanisms, mainly by providing
technical assistance and promoting exchanges of experience with other middle-income
countries.
(b) Improved capacities of the statistical system through: financial support to a selected
number of statistical operations; institutional support to the National Institute of
Statistics; capacity building in the above-mentioned sectors in order to increase the
availability and adequate use of sector statistics in line with best practices of quality,
comparability and disaggregation.
(c) Capacity development of control institutions, notably the Tribunal of Accounts, for
increased and improved control over the use of central and decentralized public
resources.
(d) Supporting mechanisms for improved dialogue and participation of social actors and
citizens, particularly women and youth, in the planning and evaluation of public policies
and programmes. This will include supporting: electoral-cycle independent institutions,
civic education, and civil society monitoring of the adaptation and implementation of a
regulatory framework in line with commitments of Cape Verde entered into with regard
to international human rights conventions.
Pillar 3: Reduction of disparities and promotion of equity
23. Assistance under this pillar will focus on three priorities.
(a) Developing an adequate understanding of the nature, determinants, depth and
manifestation of disparities and inequities in the realization of MDGs throughout the
country. This work will build on analyses of both national and local bottlenecks, and
ensure the integration and implementation of adequate responses into sectoral policies.
This latter effort will involve in particular the sectors of health (including reproductive
health), education, water and sanitation, social and child protection, justice and juvenile
justice, and employment.
7

(b) Building the capacity of municipalities and local service providers in full
coordination with the Ministry of Territorial Management, to plan, finance and deliver
quality services adapted to the local situation, guaranteeing equitable access to the most
vulnerable groups, particularly youths, adolescents and women.
(c) Develop and improve community-based and family approaches for social-change
initiatives, to include buy improving communications. This work should result in
improving demand for and use of public services, particularly by adolescents, youths
and women, but also in addressing critical child-development and child-protection
issues. The effort will also address gender-based violence and, as regards climate
change, promote avoidance of decisions that are not environmentally sustainable.
Pillar 4: Environmental sustainability and climate change adaptation
24. Interventions under this pillar will focus on the following three priorities.
(a) Consolidating environmental governance and mainstreaming environmental
sustainability, climate change adaptation and mitigation, disaster risk reduction and
management in policies and programmes at national and local levels, This work will
focus on growing economic sectors such as tourism and infrastructure; on rural
development and food security; on integrated water and sanitation management and
access; and on renewable energy. All of these areas present specific gender challenges,
such as those related to livelihoods strategies, access to resources including information
and participation in decision-making processes. These will be analysed and taken into
account in intervention design and implementation.
(b) Reinforcing the development of an integrated and gender-sensitive approach to the
protection of biodiversity, to be implemented by both the public and private sectors.
(c) Capacity building of civil society and municipal actors for gender-sensitive
advocacy, and the formulation and implementation of community-based sustainable
natural-resources management projects, particularly via the Small grants Programme of
the Global Environment Fund (GEF).
25. Considering that the transversality of this pillar is central to economic and social needs,
and the fact that the well-being of the population depends on ecosystems, the preservation of
the natural resource base is an integral part of this support to the national development
framework. Under this assistance the relationship between land degradation and poverty
reduction will take a central role, focusing on gender equity and the most vulnerable rural
families, particularly women and children, in order to break the vicious cycle between
poverty and land degradation. Climate change risks and opportunities will be screened in all
vulnerable sectors. The overarching challenge of water scarcity, particularly for the most
vulnerable families in rural areas, will also be addressed.

IV.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
26. The entire programme will be nationally executed with efforts made to increase the
integration of evolving national planning and financial management systems. This will entail
continuous support to the national monitoring and evaluation system currently being
elaborated. In addition, and in coordination with the National Institute of Statistics, there will
be a need to increase the availability of fully disaggregated data, to support analysis and
planning. The joint office will continue to make use of the harmonized approach to cash
transfers (HACT), which has been in place since 2006. It will provide improved support to
national partners’ capacity-development efforts in this regard.
27. UNDP will continue to be the support agency, as established at the time of creation of
the joint office, providing administrative, financial and programmatic rules and procedures.
Efforts will be made by the office to further review internal structures, processes and
systems, adequately calling on the Headquarters services of the three agencies, with a view
to reducing both transaction and overall costs of the office, while efficiently supporting the
interventions of the three constituting agencies in a fully integrated manner. The programme

8

will be managed and executed within the framework of the UNDAF, giving preference to
joint programming modalities, with annual reviews anchored to UNDAF monitoring
mechanisms. Joint United Nations-Government pillar-based working groups will ensure
substantive supervision and monitoring of the execution. Nevertheless, agency-specific
concerns will continue to be followed according to the indicators reflected in the agencies’
specific matrices under an integrated monitoring and evaluation system. Reporting will be
carried out in a similar fashion. Building on existing partnerships, the office will seek
increasing collaboration with international partners, particularly Budget Support Group
members, while aiming to identify new opportunities for the mobilization of resources,
including by developing partnerships with emerging and non-traditional donors.

9

Annex 1. UNDP results and resources framework for Cape Verde, 2012 - 2016
Resources for 2012-2015: Regular: $2,379,000; Other: $19,460,756; Total: $21,839,756
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Build a dynamic, competitive, innovative and sustainable economy with shared prosperity for all
COUNTRY PROGRAMME / UNDAF OUTCOME #1: (i) National policies and programmes for development and poverty reduction reinforce competitiveness and
sustainable, pro-poor growth; (ii) the private sector, particularly micro, small and medium enterprises in rural and urban areas, has improved access to markets and technical
and financial services, and increases its competitiveness and contributions to decent employment generation.
Outcome indicators: poverty rate; unemployment rate
Related strategic plan focus areas: poverty reduction and achievement of the MDGs
GOVERNMENT
PARTNER
CONTRIBUTION

Government will
pursue national
initiatives for
private-sector
development and
investment
promotion.

OTHER PARTNER
CONTRIBUTIONS

UNDP
CONTRIBUTION

Development partners
will continue to support,
design and monitor the
national macroeconomic
framework and pursue
support to build and
strengthen economic
infrastructure.

Technical assistance
on data production and
analyses, poverty and
vulnerability, policy
formulation on trade
reform, decent
employment and
poverty reduction
strategies.

INDICATOR (I), BASELINES (B) AND
TARGETS (T) FOR UNDP
CONTRIBUTIONS

I: Conditional cash transfer (CCT)
programme implemented
B: non-existent; T - designed and
implemented
I: % of SMEs benefiting from business
development services
B: N/A; T: increase by 10%
I: % of DTIS projects implemented
B: 0; T: 80%

INDICATIVE COUNTRY
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS

Technical analyses of
poverty/vulnerability/
equity for poverty reduction
options including CCT
programme design; SME
development strategy for
decent jobs.

INDICATIVE
RESOURCES
BY
OUTCOME
($)

Regular
500,000
Other
2,500,000

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Consolidate democracy, deepen liberties, and reinforce good governance
COUNTRY PROGRAMME / UNDAF OUTCOME #2: Public administrations and control institutions are more efficient and effective in planning, budgeting,
implementation and M&E in line with international commitments; dialogue and civic participation are guaranteed, particularly for youth and women.
Outcome indicator: rate of citizens satisfied with public services; improvement of public finances management ratings by Budget Support Group evaluations: Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) monitoring indicators.
Related strategic plan focus areas: democratic governance
Pursue
administrative
reform/social
cohesion
programmes.

10

Development
partners/Budget Support
Group will pursue
support for national
transformation agenda
and budget support
management.

Institutional and
technical capacity
development for public
finances,
accountability and
civic participation.

I: Programme-based budgeting ratings
improved
B: C+ (PEFA rating)
T: B (PEFA rating)
I: % of accounts judged annually by the
Court of Auditors
B: 36%; T: +50%

Technical assistance and
capacity building on mediumterm expenditure framework
in line with best standards;
design of new strategy of
court of auditors; and
mobilization and technical
assistance to civil society on

Regular
1,029,000
Other:
1,750,000

Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper alternative reporting.
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promote development and social cohesion and facilitate access to basic services
COUNTRY PROGRAMME / UNDAF OUTCOME #3: Disparity/inequity reduction integrated into sectoral and intersectoral, national and local policies, local service
development and use by the most vulnerable of quality services is guaranteed.
Outcome indicator: Youth’s and women’s use rates of basic services; teenage pregnancy rates.
Related strategic plan focus areas: poverty reduction, achievement of the MDGs and development, green growth
Continued
investments in
infrastructure,
passing and
implementation of
decentralization
law.

Development partners
support technical and
financially the
infrastructure
development in key
sectors (water and
sanitation, housing,
health).

Informed advocacy
and policy dialogue,
capacity building of
local actors for
participatory planning
and implementation in
the context of climatechange risks and
opportunities.

I: # of validated national MDG analyses
implemented
B:2; T:7
I: # of local MDG action plans
implemented.
B:0; T:10
I: # of gender-based municipal
development plans
B:1; T:10

Technical assistance and
institutional capacity building
for the MDG-based municipal
development plans and
territorial planning scheme.
Technical analysis for genderbased municipal development
plans.
Advocacy for partner
interventions in the context of
climate change, risks and
opportunities.

Regular:
600,000
Other:
1,500,000

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promote environmentally sustainable management of natural resources and protection of biodiversity
COUNTRY PROGRAMME / UNDAF OUTCOMEs #4: Institutions reinforce environmental governance and integrate principles of environmental sustainability, climate
change and disaster relief reduction; public and private institutions adopt a holistic approach to conservation and protection of critical habitats and biodiversity. Outcome
indicator: % of public resources allocated to environment; Number of key sector strategies integrating environmental dimension.
Related strategic plan focus areas: Energy and environment for sustainable development and green growth
Reinforce
institutional and
coordination
capacities,
including with
civil society, for
improved
environmental
management.

Development partners
will contribute to
institutional building,
particularly in relation
to water management
and renewable
energies.

Support to policy
formulation and
information gathering for
key sectors, continued
institutional support, and
capacity building of civil
society organizations
(CSOs)/community
based organizations.

I: % of new marine and land protected
areas with management plans
B: 3; T: 13
I: # of national, local and sectoral laws in
line with international
commitments/agreements
B: NA; T: 50%
I: # of women currently involved in sand
extraction for income now benefiting from
alternative income generating activities
B: NA; T: 50%

Integration of climate change
and disaster risk reduction
into territorial plans; national
institutions and CSOs trained
and strengthened in
environmental management.

Regular:
250,000
Other:
13,710,756

11

Annex 2. UNFPA results and resources framework for Cape Verde, 2012 - 2016
National priorities: (a) promote development and social cohesion and facilitate access to basic services; and (b) reorganize the national health system and ensure its
sustainability
UNDAF outcomes: (a) efforts to reduce disparities and inequities are integrated into sectoral and intersectoral policies at national and local levels; and (b)
development of high-quality local services and their use by the most vulnerable populations is guaranteed
Programme Country
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and targets
Indicative
component
programme
resources by
Partners
outcomes,
programme
indicators, baselines
component
and targets
Reproductive Outcome: National
Output 1: By 2016, intersectoral partnerships, especially among the health, education
Cape Verdean $4 million
health and
and local
and youth sectors, are reinforced to improve responses to the needs of young people in
Institute for
($3 million
rights
institutions address
the areas of sexual and reproductive health and rights and HIV prevention, especially
Gender
from regular
disparities in sexual for young women
Equality and
resources and
and reproductive
Output indicators:
Equity;
$1 million
health and rights,
Ministries of:
from other
 Percentage of adolescent pregnancies. Baseline: 15% (2009); Target: to be
especially among
Education;
resources)
determined
young people and
Health; and
 Contraceptive prevalence rate among young people
women
Youth,
Baseline: 23% (2005); Target: to be determined (disaggregated by age, sex,
Outcome indicators:
Employment
municipality, urban/rural area and quintile)
and Human
 Policies and
 Percentage of young people with access to reproductive health services at youth
strategies at the
centres and health centres, including those operated by non-governmental organizations Resources
Development
central level integrate (NGOs)
the needs of local and Baseline: not available; Target: 50%
special groups, in line  Number of sectoral contingency plans that are gender sensitive. Baseline: 0; Target: Decentralized
health
with the Programme
2
structures;
of Action of the
 Percentage of institutional deliveries
International
Baseline: to be determined; Target: to be determined, and analysed by age, municipality hospitals;
NGOs,
Conference on
and urban/rural area
including
Population and
 Percentage of HIV-positive pregnant women who have access to services that
those focusing
Development (ICPD)
prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Baseline: 85%; Target: 95%
on
Baseline: 0; Target: 2 Output 2: By 2016, 100 per cent of family planning financing is borne by the national
reproductive
(health and youth)
budget
health
 Percentage of
Output indicator:
family planning
 Percentage of contraceptive costs that are covered by the national budget. Baseline:
World Health
programme costs,
0 (2012); Target: 40% (2014)
Organization
including purchases
Output 3: By 2016, health structures, especially reproductive health structures, offer
of contraceptives,
services that meet minimum standards of quality at both central and decentralized levels and other
United
covered by the
Output indicators:
Nations
national budget
 Percentage of unmet need for family planning (disaggregated by age, sex,
organizations
12

Baseline: 0%; Target:
100%

municipality, urban/rural area and quintile). Baseline: 10% (2005); Target: 5%
 Percentage of users satisfied with reproductive health services (disaggregated by
age, sex, municipality, urban/rural area and quintile). Baseline: to be determined;
Target: 50%

National priorities: (a) promote development and social cohesion; and (b) facilitate access to basic services
UNDAF outcomes: (a) public administrations and institutions are more efficient and effective in planning, budgeting, implementing, and monitoring and evaluating,
in line with international commitments; and (b) dialogue and participation are guaranteed, particularly for youth and women
Programme Country programme
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and targets
Indicative
component
outcomes, indicators, baselines
resources
Partners
and targets
by
programme
component
Population
Outcome 1: Policymakers and
Output 1: By 2016, the capacity of national and subnational statistical
Ministries of:
$1.7 million
and
NGOs make better use of
institutions is reinforced to better integrate indicators related to the
Education;
($1 million
development disaggregated data at national
Millennium Development Goals and the Programme of Action of the ICPD
Finance and
from regular
and decentralized levels for
Output indicators:
Planning; and
resources
decision-making on population
● Number of key Millennium Development Goals and ICPD indicators,
Health;
and $0.7
dynamics and on reducing
disaggregated by gender, age and geographical area, which are integrated
National
million
disparities
into existing information systems and databases. Baseline: 1 (education);
Institute of
from other
Outcome indicator: Percentage
Target: 4
Statistics
resources)
of data and information systems
● Percentage of Millennium Development Goal indicators produced using
on population dynamics and the
comprehensive data disaggregated by sex, age, urban/rural area and
UNDP
reduction of disparities
municipality
disaggregated at national and
Baseline: 0%; Target: 70%
local levels. Baseline: data are
partially disaggregated; Target:
Output 2: By 2016, all key sectoral policies address the needs of young
Cape Verdean
at least 50% of new data are
people in a changing environment
Institute for
fully disaggregated at national
Output indicator:
Gender Equality
and local levels
● Number of sectors that address issues related to young people and that
and Equity;
Outcome 2: The rights and
encourage the social participation of youth in programme areas, as called for
Ministry of
Total for
multisectoral needs of women
in the strategic plan for youth, 2012-2016. Baseline: 0; Target: 4
Youth,
programme
and young people are
Output 3: By 2016, strengthened multisectoral mechanisms are
Employment and coordination
incorporated into public policies, operational to reduce and respond to violence against women and girls
Human
and
poverty reduction plans and
Output indicator:
Resources
assistance:
expenditure frameworks
● Percentage of women aged 15-49 who have experienced domestic violence Development;
$1.2 million
Outcome indicators:
during the last 12 months. Baseline: 20%; Target: to be determined
municipalities
● The multisectoral needs of
Output 4: By 2016, civil society, media, women and men in programme areas
women and young people are
promote responsible sexual behaviour and prevent violence against women
NGOs focusing
better reflected within the third
Output indicators:
on reproductive
national growth and poverty
● Percentage of women and men aged 15-49 who agree that a husband or
health, women
reduction strategy paper.
companion is justified in hitting or beating his wife or companion for specific and young
13

Baseline: needs are partially
integrated into second paper;
Target: needs are fully integrated
into third paper
● Multisectoral mechanisms are
in place to monitor and reduce
gender-based violence. Baseline:
gender-based violence networks
in 8 of 22 municipalities; Target:
strengthened national
coordination, wider local
coverage (over 50%, 11
municipalities)

14

reasons (per urban/rural location, island and quintile). Baseline: 17% women,
16% men (2005); Target: to be determined
● Number of communication programmes on sexual behaviour and gender
violence that are implemented. Baseline: 0 (complete); Target: 3

people
International
Labour
Organization;
UN-Women

Annex 3. UNICEF summary results matrix, 2012–2016, including the indicative budget
UNICEF programme component: Child survival and development

Regular resources: $550,000
Other resources: $800,000

Millennium Development Goals: 1; 2; 4; 5; and 6
Convention of the Rights of the Child articles: 28; 29; 24; 37
National development priorities: Promote development and social cohesion and facilitate access to basic services
UNDAF outcomes: Disparity/inequity reduction integrated into sectoral and intersectoral national and local policies, local service development and use by the most
vulnerable of quality services is guaranteed
Major partners, partnership
Programme component
Programme component
Key progress indicators, baselines and targets1
frameworks and cooperation
result(s)
programmes
Child survival and
Women and children have
Indicator: Percentage (%) of children and women with access to
Ministry and Departments of
development
equitable access to national
basic health services (to be analysed by sex, age, Municipality,
Health, Social Development and
(Medium-term strategic
and decentralized health
urban/rural, quintile).
Food Security; National Institute
plan [MTSP]
services, reinforced for
Baseline: Not available.
for Statistics; Brazil;
focus area 1:
increased quality.
Target: To be determined (TBD).
Luxembourg; national civil
young child survival and
society organizations (CSOs);
Indicator: % of children aged under 1 year vaccinated with three
development)
community-based organizations
doses of combined diphtheria/ pertussis/ tetanus vaccine (DTC3)
(CBOs); FAO, UNFPA; WHO.
and Penta3.
Baseline: 2009: DTC3: 94%. Penta3: Not available..
Target: 2016: 95%.
Indicator: % of institutional deliveries.
Baseline: 2005: 78%.
Target: 2016: 90%.
Indicator: % of anaemia among children under age 5 (to be
analysed by sex, age, municipalities, urban/rural, quintile).
Baseline: 2009: 52%.
Target: TBD.
Indicator: % of HIV-positive pregnant women with access to
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
Baseline: 85%.
Target: 95%.
Indicator: % of families that adopt at least 2 essential practices.
UNICEF programme component: Education and early childhood development equity and quality

1

Regular resources: $500,000
Other resources: $500,000

Some baselines and targets are to be defined at the beginning of the programme and will be informed by the next government programme currently under definition.

15

Equitable access to
quality education and
early childhood
development (ECD)
(MTSP focus area 2:
basic education and
gender equality)

Increased retention and
learning achievements in
primary education and
improved access to secondary
education with special focus
on girls. All children under 6
have access to quality, well
regulated comprehensive
programmes and services for
ECD.

% of school dropout rates in primary and secondary (6-17
years).
Baseline: 2007: 11.7%.
Target: 2016: 6% (rate and factors to be analysed per sex,
urban/rural, island, quintile).
Indicator: Completion rate to last primary grade.
Baseline: 2009: 94%.
Target: TBD (per sex, urban/rural, municipalities, quintile).

Ministry and Departments of
Education, Social Development,
Youth, and Employment,
Finances and Planning; National
Institute for Statistics; Brazil;
Luxembourg; national CSOs and
CBOs; UNESCO; UNFPA.

Indicator: Use of improved school sanitation facilities.
Baseline: 87%.
Target: 96% (urban/rural).
Use of improved school drinking water.
Baseline: 87%.
Target: 96% (urban/rural).
% of children aged 4-6 years attending preschool.
Baseline: 2009: 57%.
Target: 2016: 72% (per sex, region, municipality, quintile).

UNICEF programme component: Child and adolescent protection

Regular resources: $700,000

Millennium Development Goals: 1; 2; and 4
Convention of the Rights of the Child articles: 7; 32; 18; 26; 27; and 39
National development priorities: Promote development and social cohesion and facilitate access to basic services
UNDAF outcome: Improve local capacities for equitable provision and demand for quality services for children, adolescents and women
Child and adolescent
protection
(MTSP focus area 4:
child protection against
violence, exploitation and
abuse)

Children and adolescents,
especially girls and women,
are protected from abuse,
violence and exploitation
through regulatory
frameworks and service
delivery mechanisms.

% of children under age 5 with birth registration.
Baseline: 91.4% (urban/rural, location, island, quintile).
Target: TBD.
% of adolescent pregnancy.
Baseline: 2009: 14.7% (urban/rural location, municipality,
quintile).
Target: TBD.
% of women and men aged 15-49 years who agree that a
husband/companion is justified in hitting or beating his wife for
specific reasons (per urban/rural location, municipality,
quintile).
Baseline: 2005: 17% women; 16% men.
Target: Not available.
% of cases of child abuse reported to authorities with adequate

16

Ministry and Departments of
Social Development, Justice,
Health and Education; National
Institution for Gender Equality
and Equity; National Institute for
Statistics; Brazil; Luxembourg;
national CSOs and CBOs;
national media partners;
association of municipalities;
UNDP, UNFPA; UN-Women.

case management.
Baseline: Not available.
Target: TBD.
Existence of national policy, financial allocations and locallevel/municipal action plans for family and alternative child
care, including national implementation of international
commitments.
Baseline: Not in existence at this stage.
UNICEF programme component: Evidence-based policy planning and budgeting

Regular resources: $900,000
Other resources: $700,000

Millennium Development Goal: 2
Convention of the Rights of the Child articles: 29; 32; and 18
National development priorities: Empower families and reinforce social cohesion
UNDAF outcome: Improve local capacities for equitable provision and demand for quality services for children, adolescents and women
Evidence-based policy
planning and budgeting
(MTSP focus area 5:
policy advocacy and
partnerships for children’s
rights)

Fully disaggregated statistics
made available and
disaggregated data analysis
utilized in support of
formulation and reporting on
implementation of key child,
adolescent and gender-friendly
laws, policies and
programmes, including
contingency planning.

Reliable and operational national data base to keep track and
report on the key socio-economic indicators on the realization
of the MDGs.
Baseline: Not available.
% increase in social expenditure and social protection
expenditure (or per capita) relative to the % increase in the
overall national budget (or GDP per capita).
Expenditure reviews in 2011 to determine baselines and targets.
% budget execution vs budgeted for the basic social services
sectors and social protection.
Target: 100% by 2016.

Ministry and Departments of State
Reforms (Prime Ministry),
Finances and Planning, Social
Development, Youth, Health, and
Education; National Institute for
Statistics; national CSOs;
Association of Cape Verdean
Municipalities (ANMCV); World
Bank and Budget Support Group
members; ILO; UNDP; UNFPA.

Number of municipal development plans including investment
cases for children and adolescents.
Baseline: Not available.
Number of child/gender-sensitive sector contingency plans.
Baseline: Not available.
Cross sectoral costs:

Regular resources: $1,100,000

17

