Central African Republic
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Central African
Republic (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.21) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (2023 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data

†

(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

171

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)

24

(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

22/26, 25/17
540 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1994-2006)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)

64/54 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2008)

46

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

67

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

34

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

4.7

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)

47

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

49
51/48, 72/36, 23/83

GNI per capita (US$)

450

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

54

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

62

†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
850 deaths per 100,000 live births is the adjusted 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal
Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank,
together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
After years of conflict, the Central African Republic has completed the first
steps on the path to peace and the transition to development. The recent presidential
and legislative elections are seen as an opportunity for improving governance,
indispensable to political, economic and social progress. However, the process
remains fragile. A confidence deficit among the parties to the peace process; the
possible resurgence of armed conflict in the north; delays in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants; and the presence of foreign
armed groups 1 threaten the country’s political and social stability. The humanitarian
situation remains precarious, with more than 192,000 persons internally displaced
and approximately 40,000 refugees.
2.
The weak government presence in significant parts of the country, a result of
the conflict, added to the lack of decentralized planning, resource allocation and
decision-making, accounts for the weak social services system throughout the
country. Insufficient coordination between ministries and partners and lack of
__________________
1

2

These include the Lord’s Resistance Army as well as Chadian and Ugandan armed forces.

accountability exacerbate the situation. The universal lack of quality data prevents
comprehensive planning and makes it difficult to reach the most vulnerable.
3.
Child health indicators vary greatly across the country, with acute disparities
evident between provinces and households. The under-five mortality rate (U5MR)
and infant mortality rate have fallen since 1990 but remain high, respectively at
171 per 1,000 live births and 112 per 1,000 live births in 2009. The poorest quintile
shows a U5MR of 223 per 1,000 live births. Rural-urban disparities continue to be
significant, with U5MR in urban areas at 126 per 1,000 live births, compared to
199 in rural areas. Geographical disparities between north and south exist as well.
Malaria is one of the three principle causes of under-five mortality, along with acute
respiratory infections and diarrhoea. Only 5 per cent of children sleep under an
insecticide-treated mosquito net. Malnutrition is an important concern, with rates of
stunting above 30 per cent in large parts of the country. Nine of seventeen
prefectures have acute malnutrition rates higher than the national average of
10.2 per cent. Poor feeding practices, HIV and poverty are the principle causes of
malnutrition.
4.
While access to safe water is the only Millennium Development Goal
potentially within reach before 2015, in 2009 only 30 per cent of the popula tion
used an improved water source, and stark inequities between the richest and poorest
quintiles remain. Sanitation coverage remains very low, at 5.3 per cent, according to
recent national data used for sector-related planning. 2
5.
The weak health systems and poor governance of past funding have made it
difficult to effectively and credibly address the needs of HIV-affected women and
children. Women represent only a third of patients accessing critical services, yet
they are twice as likely to be infected as men (8 per cent versus 4 per cent). Also,
the prevalence is twice as high for women in urban settings compared to rural
settings. Regional disparities are significant, with the highest prevalence found in
the northern post-conflict zones. In 2005, the country had an estimated 143,850
AIDS-affected orphaned and vulnerable children, and fewer than half of them
requiring treatment were actually receiving it.
6.
In the last 20 years, the net primary education enrolment rate has risen only
very slightly, from 58 per cent to 63 per cent, and education quality has deteriorated.
The two lowest quintiles account for only 27 per cent of enrolled children compared
to 54 per cent for the two highest quintiles. In addition to gender and economic
inequities, geographical and rural/urban disparities remain considerable. They are
particularly pronounced in emergency and post-conflict zones, which are not
receiving the necessary and proportionally greater investment. Only 30 per cent of
children complete primary education, and at least half of teachers have no formal
qualification. Once again regional disparities resulting from conflict come into play,
as the largest proportions of unqualified teachers are in post -conflict areas.
7.
Persistent gender inequalities remain. Girls are three times less likely than
boys to complete secondary school. More than two out of three women are illiterate,
and very few women can be found in positions of authority. 3 Sociocultural norms,
__________________
2

3

Plan d’Action Sectoriel Eau Assainissement 2008-2010, Directorate General of Hydraulics,
Bangui, 2009, pp. 7-9.
In 2009 women represented only 16 per cent of civil servants, 14 per cent of teachers, 9 per cent
of parliamentarians, 11 per cent of Ministers and 4 per cent of magistrates.

3

exacerbated by poverty and lack of political will, perpetuate marginalization of girls
and women and general acceptance of violence. Six per cent of women report being
victims of sexual violence and 22 per cent report being victims of domestic
violence.
8.
The rights of children continue to be violated, despite the validation of
national policies on child protection, adoption of a national strategic framework for
orphaned and vulnerable children, and a recently created Inter-ministerial
Committee, led by the Prime Minister, The committee’s mandate is to har monise,
coordinate and oversee the implementation of all new or existing child protection
related policies. While 47 per cent of children between 5 and 14 are working, for
school children between ages 5 and 11 the figure even goes above 50 per cent, and
the situation is worse in the rural areas. 4 Only 1 in 10 orphaned and vulnerable
children receive some form of care and support. Of those that do, 85 per cent live in
Bangui, reflecting the almost total lack of formal support mechanisms outside the
capital. Poor implementation of the multitude of national laws, policies and plans
precludes adequate child protection. Moreover, the persistence of certain laws that
do not serve children’s interests, such as the criminalization of witchcraft, worsens
the situation.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
9.
The UNICEF child survival and development programme’s investment in high impact interventions implemented at scale contributed to the reduction of und er-five
child mortality. UNICEF and the Ministry of Health distributed 1.8 million
insecticide-treated mosquito nets and rehabilitated six health facilities and two
hospitals. Revision and roll-out of training modules for health workers supported
implementation of integrated management of child illnesses in 18 health facilities
with a catchment population of 3 million.
10. In addition, UNICEF and partners treated 18,000 severely malnourished
children and provided 13.3 million vitamin capsules over the last five years. Yearly
mother-child health weeks reached around 800,000 children. Ninety-five new water
points and latrines were constructed in schools, health facilities and communities,
bringing potable water to an additional 65,000 women and children. Alon g with
implementation of a hand-washing programme, this reduced the risks induced by
contaminated water. UNICEF organized a poverty reduction strategy programme
(PRSP) donor round table for water in 2009 and launched the community-led total
sanitation (CLTS) approach in 2010.
11. UNICEF efforts towards prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT)
of HIV, in partnership with UNITAID, expanded service from 13 per cent of HIVinfected mothers in 2009 to 24 per cent in 2010. A youth vulnerability study
informed a gender-sensitive youth and HIV sector plan and provided training
materials and standards for youth-friendly counselling services. UNICEF ensured
the inclusion of a nutrition module in the new PMTCT training manuals and of HIV
issues in the guidelines for paediatric care. UNICEF also financed rehabilitation and
__________________
4

4

See MICS 3 (2006), page 149, table CP. 3.

equipment for Bangui Paediatric Hospital, the only health centre in the country that
offers services for HIV-positive children. UNICEF has partnered with the World
Health Organization and the Institute Pasteur to launch HIV testing for children
using the dry blood spot technique.
12. UNICEF support to primary education resulted in the enrolment of an
additional 240,000 children and a 33 per cent increase in girl’s enrolment in
prefectures with less than 40 per cent enrolment as of 2007. UNICEF financed the
construction and/or rehabilitation of 130 schools and provided equipment and books
as well as training for 2,237 parent-teachers.
13. UNICEF support for children affected by the conflict successfully
disassociated 5,193 children from armed groups, reunified them with their families
and integrated them back into communities. The programme facilitated access to
education, health, counselling services and psychological support for 97,797
children. Training on child rights and United Nations resolutions was provided to
1,000 armed actors in the conflict. As part of UNICEF support for protection of
orphaned and vulnerable children, training was provided for 12, 000 teachers,
village leaders, local authorities and health agents, including 7,900 persons from the
Aka minority ethnic group. Around 110,000 orphaned and vulnerable children were
also enrolled in schools due to UNICEF support.
14. At a systems level, support led to revision of the Labour Code; submission of
optional protocols on child trafficking, prostitution, pornography and children in
armed conflict; adaptation of the law on diversionary justice for children;
implementation of an action plan against abuse, sexual exploitation and chil d
trafficking; and a functioning youth parliament.
15. A knowledge, attitudes and practices study, a situation analysis of children and
women, and a complementary youth-led situation analysis were completed in 2009,
informing UNICEF programming and that of its partners. The country is finalizing a
fourth multiple indicator cluster survey (MICS 4) and four regional statistical
dashboards. These are directly attributable to UNICEF efforts to strengthen social
information and monitoring and evaluation systems.
Lessons learned
16. The strategic importance of partnerships with international non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) has been critical for delivering services, particularly to
conflict-affected and transition areas. A case in point is the umbrella partnership
with an international NGO that allowed UNICEF to work with a host of national and
international NGOs to distribute 1.8 million mosquito nets. At the same time the
expertise brought to the field by international NGOs can be harnessed to build th e
capacity of national NGOs and decentralized government institutions to scale up the
delivery of basic social services for children.
17. At a technical level, poor understanding of community dynamics in the Central
African Republic, key to promoting the participation of communities and their role
in establishing community-based outreach, has diminished the impact of UNICEF
across all programmes. A more refined analysis of community and equity dynamics
will be a thrust of the new programme.
18. The role of essential family practices has clearly been established as a cross cutting priority based on local and global research and analysis. Evaluations and

5

reports consistently identify community mobilization as a weakness of the
programme. Clearly a fundamental part of UNICEF implementation in all
programmes, community mobilization has been retained for incorporation in the
next country programme.
19. The water and sanitation and hygiene (WASH) programme has reaped the
benefits of a close and fruitful working relationship with the World Bank. Through
this relationship, the programme has gained considerable trust from the line
ministry. This has allowed UNICEF to balance its role as interlocutor between the
humanitarian community and the Ministry while enabling it to effectively advocate
for integration of new approaches, such as CLTS, into the government framework of
cooperation.
20. Analysis shows that vaccination campaigns bring children vital protection
against killer diseases throughout the country. However, vaccination rates are not
sustained between one costly campaign and the next. In addition, even with
campaign vaccination rates of up to 90 per cent, it is very likely that the most
vulnerable children continue to be unreached. This analysis suggests that a
combination of campaigns and support to routine services remains vital and that, for
both, further programming to reach the most vulnerable children is important.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival and development

5 500

29 500

35 000

Water, sanitation and hygiene

1 490

7 000

8 490

Basic education and gender parity

2 490

10 000

12 490

Child protection

2 500

6 000

8 500

Social policy, planning and
monitoring and evaluation

2 520

2 000

4 520

Communication for development

1 500

2 000

3 500

Cross-sectoral costs

3 315

3 500

6,815

19 315

60 000

79 315

Total

Around $7 million is expected annually in emergency funds.

Preparation process
21. The country programme preparation began with the midterm review and a
youth-led situation analysis of children and women, which provided young people a
crucial voice and a credible opportunity for participation in the proce ss. In 2010, the
United Nations country team completed a common country assessment and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The programme
falls under the UNDAF umbrella framework, and the time frames are harmonized.
The UNDAF and hence the country programme are aligned with the PRSP II
priorities. For the first time, Central African Republic will have a joint United

6

Nations country programme action plan, strengthening coherence and
accountability. Similarly, the UNDAF will integrate the work plan of the United
Nations political mission. The programme has been prepared in consultation with
the Ministry of Planning.
Programme and component results and strategies
22. Capacity development is the core strategic thrust of the programme . All
components will focus on building the capacity of government institutions at
national and decentralized levels, as well as the capacity of national NGOs. A
significant on-the-job coaching component will be put in place through umbrella
partnerships with international NGOs. A second thrust will support the recruitment
and seconding of expertise within line ministries. A third will foster linkages to
regional training and information exchange fora.
23. Advocacy and communication will be an important strategy across the
programme. Policy-level change will be sought through national coordination
networks and in partnership with an increasingly coherent United Nations country
team, in the context of an integrated mission. Newly strengthened participation of
young people through fora such as the youth parliament and a number of key civil
society organizations will constitute additional advocacy channels. Local and
international media, donors and the public will have timely access to information on
women and children.
24. Umbrella partnerships with key international NGOs will be a principle means
of scaling up service delivery components of the programme. An enhanced United
Nations presence under the leadership of an integrated mission will also foster an
environment for joint programming. At international and regional levels, UNICEF
will focus on strengthening government partnerships with the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, GAVI Alliance, Education for All Fast Track
Initiative and UNITAID.
25. UNICEF will continue to lead the nutrition, WASH and education clusters in
the country and to assure that UNICEF meets the organization’s Core Commitments
for Children in Humanitarian Action in all localized and ongoing emergencies
related to natural disaster or conflict. Furthermore, UNICEF will review
possibilities and begin programming on disaster risk reduction and peace building
when opportunities arise. This will enhance national, local and internal capacities
for prevention and mitigation, response and recovery.
26. The programme will emphasize a community-based approach to increase both
access to and use of basic social services. Community outreach will be used as one
of the means of responding to the current inequities in access. The outreach strategy
will be based on a careful analysis of the community and its coping mechanisms and
will create the basis for UNICEF to contribute to a national social protection policy.
27. The correct implementation of a human rights-based approach implies
mainstreaming of gender equality. Both the UNDAF and the programme
development process included in-depth training on the human rights approach to
programming and gender. However, both principles require constant application
throughout the programming cycle. The recently completed 2011 gender audit lays
out a set of recommendations on how this can be done.

7

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
28. The UNICEF programme falls within the three UNDAF pillars of: (a) peace
consolidation and strengthening of good governance, security and rule of law;
(b) investment in human capital, including the fight against HIV/AIDS; and
(c) promotion of sustainable and equitable development. Pillar 1 captures key
components of the UNICEF child protection programme, while Pillar 2 is the
overarching framework for the four sectoral programmes of child survival and
development, education, WASH and child protection. The communication for
development programme will support the service delivery component of the four
sectoral programmes, with an emphasis on essential family practices, HIV and
routine vaccination and campaigns.
Relationship to international priorities
29. The Millennium Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals define
the strategic objectives of the entire United Nations programme in the Central
African Republic. The UNICEF country programme is guided by the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Planned results are consistent with the Millennium
Development Goals, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the ‘Unite for
Children, Unite against AIDS’ campaign, the campaign to ‘treat every child as your
own’, the Plan of Action adopted by the General Assembly Special Session on
Children, the Abuja Declaration and the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan 20062013.
Programme components
30. Child survival and development. The programme will achieve two results.
First, to ensure that 60 per cent of children and pregnant and lactating women use
the high-impact integrated health services, UNICEF will support the Ministry of
Health and civil society organizations to deliver results at the national and
decentralized level. Emphasis will be on improving the policy environmen t in
favour of an integrated approach to child survival and development.
31. Concurrently the programme will work with 13 of the 24 most vulnerable
health districts to build capacity to plan and deliver the integrated package of high impact health interventions. These districts will receive institutional support and
technical assistance, supplies and funds to ensure delivery of services either directly
or in partnership with NGOs. A community outreach component coupled with
effective community case management of malaria, diarrhoea, pneumonia and severe
acute malnutrition aims to reach the most vulnerable children. Vaccination
campaigns will continue to be a tool to ensure that the Expanded Programme on
Immunization antigens reach 80 per cent of children under 1 year old nationwide.
32. Nutrition remains an important concern, and UNICEF will support
establishment of a national nutritional surveillance team. As cluster lead, UNICEF
will ensure 60 per cent coverage for treatment of acute malnutrition in catchm ent
areas of all therapeutic units. To address chronic malnutrition UNICEF will support
good infant and young child feeding through an emphasis on early initiation of and
prolonged breastfeeding, along with appropriate complementary feeding practices
and maternal nutrition, dietary quality and reduction of infectious diseases. Finally,
the aim is to have 60 per cent of families nationwide adopt the four essential family

8

practices: hand washing, exclusive breastfeeding until the age of 6 months, sleeping
under a mosquito net and recognizing and appropriately treating diarrhoea.
33. The second result area addresses PMTCT and paediatric HIV. Specifically the
programme will work with the joint team on AIDS to support the national
coordination organization to develop a national HIV response plan. The programme
will ensure that the response is integrated into the package of high -impact health
interventions and that, in districts showing the highest prevalence rates, 70 per cent
of boys and girls receive appropriate treatment, including antiretroviral therapy,
along with 50 per cent of young men and women and 60 per cent of pregnant
mothers who are HIV-positive.
34. Water, sanitation and hygiene. The programme will focus on strengthening
government capacities to deliver WASH services at the decentralized level. This will
include revitalizing a maintenance system for existing water points, development of
a sanitation and hygiene policy, sensitization on hand -washing with soap, scaling up
of CLTS and development of private sector services for manual drilling of
boreholes. To strengthen national capacity, UNICEF will work with the line ministry
to advocate for increased budget to ensure that the four regional directorates of
hydraulics are fully functional. As cluster lead, UNICEF will focus on preparedness
and response activities and will maintain a contingency response for 50,000 people.
In districts showing the poorest access to and coverage of water and sanitation
services, 50 per cent of the population will have access to drinking water. Potable
water and sanitation services will be increased by 30 per cent in health facilities and
50 per cent in schools in the same districts. Seventy per cent of targeted villages in
the same districts will be declared ‘open defecation free’ through the CLTS
initiative. Finally, 60 per cent of families nationally will wash their hands
appropriately with soap.
35. Basic education and gender parity. The programme will focus on achieving a
net enrolment rate of 80 per cent for both boys a nd girls, with a focus on the most
vulnerable. Early childhood development is a sub-component of this result and aims
to enrol 30 per cent of the poorest quintile in preschool activities. This is a tool for
increasing enrolment for the most vulnerable later in primary school. A second
result will focus on the quality of education; 50 per cent of enrolled children will
complete primary school and be equipped with life skills. The programme will focus
on the provinces with the greatest gender disparities and lowest enrolment rates.
36. The programme is implemented with the Ministry of Education at national and
decentralized levels and in partnership with NGOs in parts of the country where
government capacity and access are weakest. Equally important component s of the
programme will work to build the government’s capacity to manage an information
system and respond to localized emergencies, advocate at the community level and
through parent-teacher associations, and continue to provide education tools and
supplies. To address the gap in qualified teachers and the issue of quality, UNICEF
will provide practical training to 1,200 maîtres-parents (parent-teachers) 5 and
support the Ministry with investments in education infrastructure and acceleration of
the child-friendly schools approach. UNICEF will play an active role in the
Education for All Fast Track Initiative and seek to influence funding to promote
__________________
5

The presence of rebel groups in the country’s conflict-affected regions has significantly
restricted the recruitment and retention of certified teachers, and therefore the majority of
educators in these regions are maîtres-parents.

9

equity. UNICEF will use its prominent role in the education donors and partners
coordination meetings, to promote policy change for integration of maîtres-parents
into the formal system and establish norms and standards for child -friendly schools.
37. Child protection. The programme will focus on strengthening the capacity of
the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Ministry of Justice, with the overall aim of
improving the regulatory framework, including establishment of a child protection
code. UNICEF will work for the creation of a coordinated referral system for
vulnerable children for psychosocial care and suppo rt at community and district
levels. In addition, and as part of a broader social protection strategy, the
programme will ensure that at least 30 per cent of orphaned and vulnerable children
have access to basic social services using a community-based approach for care and
support.
38. UNICEF will provide support to the new inter-ministerial committee on child
protection, which is expected to play a paramount role in ensuring implementation
of existing policies and laws and regulation of the child protection framework. A
second focus of the programme will be an integrated approach to gender-based
violence centred in the post-conflict provinces of the country, in partnership with
NGOs and United Nations partner agencies and using a community-based approach.
Half of known victims will receive an integrated legal, security, psychosocial and
health response.
39. Social policy, planning and monitoring and evaluation. The policy
environment suffers from a lack of quality data and an almost total absence of
decentralized planning mechanisms. The programme will focus on setting up a
social information system that provides planners with the wherewithal to plan,
monitor and evaluate programmes related to access basic services. One result will
focus on capacity of staff in the Ministry of Planning at national and decentralized
levels to provide the necessary analysis and coordination. The programme will
support the four provinces with the greatest disparities and highest proportion of
vulnerable children to develop provincial development plans based on Pillar 3 of the
PRSP, relating to access and use of basic social services. The second result, focusing
on the information system itself, aims to support the regular availability of four
provincial statistical databases for use by government and NGO planning processes.
Both results will enhance the capacity of government to work on the social
protection agenda. UNICEF will also support a review of the social protection
situation and the development of a social protection policy and action plan. The
planned MICS 5 in 2014 will enable the Government, partners and UNICEF to
measure trends, monitor progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and
adjust the UNICEF programmatic emphasis to address continuing disparities.
40. Communication for development. The programme will seek to increase
families’ embrace of essential family practices to 60 per cent, with a focus on the
provinces showing the greatest disparities and children and families recently
affected by conflict. A specific focus will also be maintained on mobilization for
vaccination against child killers through support to campaigns and routine services.
An intersectoral policy will be put in place to reflect the cross -sectoral nature of
essential family practices. A cadre of 10,000 community activists will have the skills
to promote essential family practices in the provinces showing the poorest uptake of
these practices. A second result area will focus on adolescent development and
primary HIV prevention to ensure that 70 per cent of children and young men and

10

women aged 15 to 24 years in high-prevalence districts understand the risks of HIV
and seek testing.
41. Cross-sectoral elements include the essential components of fund-raising and
media outreach, youth participation and staff and operating expenses related to
supply and logistics.
Major partnerships
42. The PRSP will be the framework for UNICEF engagement with the
Government and bilateral and multilateral donors. The UNDAF will be almost
aligned to the PRSP cycle, which will facilitate joint programming with United
Nations sister agencies. UNICEF will work in close partnership with the World
Food Programme; United Nations Population Fund; World Health Organization;
United Nations Development Programme; United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization; and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
43. To take results to scale for children and respond to their most urgent needs,
partnerships with key international and national NGOs will be essential. UNICEF
will also deepen its partnership with media institutions to take forward advocacy
messages and promote essential family practices and participation of youth in
national development processes.
44. Key donors and international technical partners include the Japanese
Government, European Union, World Bank, Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunisation, Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and Education
for All Fast Track Initiative. Funds from other resources for programme
implementation will be mobilized through these and other partners, including
National Committees for UNICEF. Within the country a few key private sector
partners will provide in-kind donations.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The monitoring framework for the country programme will be laid out in the
five-year integrated monitoring and evaluation plan, which is aligned to the UNDAF
and the PRSP. Principle child development indicators are outlined in the results
framework, which UNICEF will monitor through a number of studies and surveys,
including MICS 5. The UNDAF gives UNICEF leadership to strengthen social
information systems at national and decentralized levels, which implies a strong role
for DevInfo.
46. In the context of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers, a quality
assurance plan will be finalized that ensures close monitoring of partner activities
from a risk management perspective, and an evaluation will be completed. Overall
implementation of the programme will be managed by a steering committee jointly
convened by UNICEF and the Ministry of Planning. Reviews will be undertaken
annually at national and decentralized level. In addition there will be a midterm
review. UNICEF will increasingly make use of joint United Nations reviews of the
UNDAF and the United Nations country programme action plan.

11

