Chad
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Chad
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.22) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

5.9 a

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

209 b

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2010)
(urban/rural, richest/poorest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1998-2004)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2010)

30
22/33, 30/21
1100 c
55/48 d

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2010)

89 d

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

50 e

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

9f

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

3.4

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2010)

48

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2010)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

16
16/15, 42/9, 5/46

GNI per capita (US$)

620

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

23 g

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

23 h

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinf o.org/.
Preliminary data from MICS 2010 is available; although reporting has not been completed,
results of the survey are final.
a
Census 2009: child population: 6.4 million.
b
MICS 2010: U5MR: 179 per 1,000 live births.
c
1,200 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
d
Survey data.
e
MICS 2010: use of improved drinking water sources: 52%.
f
MICS 2010: use of improved sanitation facilities: 16%.
g
MICS 2010: one-year-olds immunized with DPT3: 20%.
h
MICS 2010: one-year-olds immunized against measles: 35%.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Chad faces numerous and varied challenges that have hindered its ability to
make progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. The country, among the
poorest and most deprived in the world, is ranked 163 out of 169 on the 2010
Human Development Index. More than half of the population (55 per cent) lives
below the poverty line, and inequality is pervasive. A recent study found that 63 per
cent of the population is multidimensionally poor, and an additional 28 per cent was
at risk. 1 In addition to wealth, key factors determining inequality and deprivation
are place of residence, gender and ethnic and regional affiliation.

__________________
1

2

Alkire and Santos, 2010.

2.
Children under 18 make up 57 per cent of the 11.3 million population, growing
at an average annual rate of 3.6 per cent. In addition to the well -documented socioeconomic and development challenges, the country has faced protracted geopolitical
instability and recurrent armed conflicts since independence. This has severely
hampered the country’s development and outcomes for children. Further, Chad hosts
around 320,000 refugees from Sudan and the Central African Republic and
approximately 170,000 internally displaced persons in various camps.
3.
Growing government revenues, primarily from oil, have contributed to the
gradual improvement in the country’s economic situation since 2003. But given the
continued fragile security, the bulk of the incremental financial resources have b een
spent on military/defence. Between 2004 and 2010, the education share of the
national budget fell from 15.4 per cent to 7 per cent, and the health share declined
from 6.6 per cent to 5.6 per cent. Nevertheless, in gross terms, allocations to social
sectors have increased. This is reflected in the 194 per cent increase in the budget of
six key social sectors between 2002 and 2010. However, during the same period
external financing fell by about 38 per cent, partially offsetting the increase.
4.
The under-five child mortality rate decreased from 191 in 2005 to 179 in 2010.
Despite this decline, it still is unacceptably high, and progress is slow. Polio has
resurfaced as a major public health challenge, with 26 reported cases in 2010.
Maternal mortality, at 1,200 per 100,000 live births, is one of the highest in the
world. Only 23 per cent of women were assisted by a qualified person while giving
birth. Inequality in access to health services is striking: less than 10 per cent of the
poorest households use maternal and child health services, compared to 40 per cent
for households in the richest quintile.
5.
During the past decade, chronic malnutrition was aggravated, partially by the
manifestations of climate change, coupled with the absence of systematic,
institutional response mechanisms. Between 2005 and 2010, the percentage of
underweight children climbed from 28 to 30, chronic malnutrition increased from
28 per cent to 39 per cent and acute malnutrition grew from 14.6 per cent to over
16 per cent, including 6.3 per cent children with severe acute malnutrition. Almost
one in five newborns are born with low birthweight, and only 3 per cent of women
practise exclusive breastfeeding.
6.
In the same period, though, safe water and sanitation coverage improved. The
percentage of people with access to safe water grew from 30 per cent to 44.3 per
cent, and access to sanitation tripled, from 4 per cent to 12 per cent. However,
overall coverage levels continue to be very low.
7.
The number of people living with HIV/AIDS in Chad is estimated at 210,000,
including 23,000 children under 15 years of age. The epidemic is evolving with
noticeable disparities between women and men (4 per cent infected versus 2.6 per
cent), rural versus urban settings (2.3 per cent versus 7 per cent) and in certain
regions (N’Djamena: 8.3 per cent, Logone Oriental: 9.8 per cent). HIV prevalence
among young people aged 15 to 24 years is 2.5 per cent for women and 1 per cent
for men. The prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) coverage, at
7 per cent, is insufficient, as is coverage of anti-retroviral treatment for children
infected with HIV, at 9 per cent. The number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS is
estimated to be around 120,000.

3

8.
The net primary school enrolment rate has increased from 39 per cent in 2000
to 52 per cent in 2010. However, education quality remains low, with a 21 per cent
repetition rate and a 16 per cent dropout rate (UNESCO 2010). The primary school
completion rate increased from 23 per cent in 2000 to 49 per c ent in 2010.
Community teachers, recruited by the community but not having undergone formal
training in teacher training schools, represent 67 per cent of all teaching personnel.
Given the growth in the number of students, teaching personnel would have to
increase by at least 14 per cent every year to keep up with demand. With a gender
parity index of 0.87 at primary level, and 22 per cent literacy among women aged
15–24 years, girls’ education faces significant challenges. Income and place of
residence are two of the most important factors influencing access to education.
9.
Aided by effective advocacy and follow-up support, Chad has adopted a
national policy against the use of children in armed conflict. The UNICEF supported disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme has helped in
the release and reintegration of about 1,000 children associated with various armed
forces and groups since 2007. However, the overall protection environment for
children and women in the country is extremely weak. It is reflected in low levels of
child birth registration (16 per cent) and the absence of supportive policies and
institutional mechanisms to protect vulnerable children and women. Sexual and
other forms of violence against women are common but rarely addr essed in the
absence of legal and institutional frameworks. Some 44 per cent of women aged
15-49 have suffered some form of female genital cutting, and a law prohibiting the
practice has yet to be approved.
10. The key factors impeding fulfilment of the basic rights of children and women
in Chad include protracted geopolitical instability, fragile security, widespread
poverty, top-down and multifaceted inequality, insufficient social infrastructure and
resources, weak institutional capacities, poor governance and the absence of
institutional protection mechanisms for the vulnerable and marginalized parts of the
population.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2010
Key results achieved
11. The programme supported the development of a wide range of policy-relevant
data, analysis and evidence on the situation of women and children. This included
about 35 sectoral and inter-sectoral studies, assessments and evaluations. In
addition, UNICEF led a nationwide multiple indicator cluster survey and a situation
analysis in 2010, which provided vital data on women and children in Chad. The
programme also supported other major nationwide surveys including a demographic
and health survey, the Survey on Consumption and the Informal Sect or (ECOSIT)
and the 2009 National General Population and Habitat Census.
12. The programme contributions in child survival and development include the
following key results: (a) integration of the concept of a ‘continuum of care’ in the
national health plan; (b) free maternal care services for pregnant women;
(c) adoption of a new national policy on oral rehydration salts (ORS) and zinc;
(d) commitment of the State to 100 per cent funding of vaccines for routine
immunization; (e) introduction of new vaccines, including for yellow fever and the

4

pentavalent vaccine; and (f) adoption of national protocols to prevent and treat
malnutrition. Other results include adoption of the National Hygiene Code and the
law protecting people living with HIV/AIDS from discri mination and providing free
anti-retroviral drugs.
13. In education, the key results include the integration of the Essential Learning
Package into the strategy for education quality improvement. Results in child
protection include the country’s commitment to end recruitment and use of children
in armed forces and groups and a campaign mounted against sexual and gender based violence.
14. UNICEF delivered a package of survival and development interventions for
children and women, emphasizing those living in areas affected by conflict or
emergency. The programme provided 100 per cent of vaccines, consumables and the
cold chain for routine vaccination; 20 million doses of oral polio vaccine; and
ORS/zinc for 2.5 million children under 5 years old. The number o f therapeutic
nutritional centres increased to 120 in 2009 and then to 204 in 2010, benefiting
approximately 45,000 children under 5 suffering from severe acute malnutrition.
The programme supported the construction of over 650 boreholes and 5,000 latrines
for vulnerable populations and introduced the community-led total sanitation
approach in 55 villages.
15. UNICEF support also led to a near tripling of sites offering PMTCT services
(up from 37 to 104). The number of pregnant women screened at these site s
increased from 5,400 in 2006 to 44,120 in 2010. The number of pregnant women
receiving anti-retroviral prophylaxis also tripled, from 312 in 2006 to 1,000 in 2010,
while the number of HIV-positive children undergoing treatment increased from 6 in
2005 to 976 in 2010.
16. In education, the programme supported 1,105 schools benefiting 286,500
students, including 85,750 girls in 10 regions. Around 60,000 children aged 3 to
5 years (60 per cent girls) attended 279 preschool establishments to prepare them for
primary school. In addition, about 25,000 parents of children under 2 years old
benefited from the parental education activities related to the Accelerated Child
Survival and Development Strategy. In the area of protection, around 1,000 children
demobilized from armed forces and groups benefited from transitional care, and a
majority of them were reintegrated into their families.
17. As part of humanitarian support for the population affected by conflict
(refugees, internally displaced persons and host communities), the programme
ensured 90 per cent immunization coverage for children under 5. Approximately
16,000 children received nutritional treatment. The rate of severe acute malnutrition
was kept at 10.6 per cent in refugee camps in the east and under 5 per cent for those
in southern Chad. Additionally, over 400,000 people affected by conflict benefited
from improved water and sanitation services. Since 2008, the programme has
supported the enrolment of over 90,000 refugee and displaced children in primar y
school and 33,000 in preschool. In addition, close to 30,000 refugee and internally
displaced children benefited from psychosocial care in 50 UNICEF -supported childfriendly spaces.

5

Lessons learned
18. Given the fragile country context of Chad, the geopolitical instability and
security situation continue to be the main determinants of development priorities,
use of resources and follow-up action. This was reinforced by the destabilizing
events during the first half of the programme cycle, including at tempts by rebel
forces to take over the capital city in April 2006 and February 2008, which
significantly hampered development progress.
19. The 2008 midterm review and other assessments suggest that even evidence based interventions might not yield expected results in Chad unless they are suitably
adapted to the country context.
20. Programme implementation and service delivery could benefit from
community-based approaches, which improve effectiveness and results by bringing
programme management, monitoring and oversight closer to realities on the ground.
21. Given the magnitude and complexities of the development challenges, tough
work environment and limited resources in Chad, it is crucial to build synergies
between agencies, programmes and interventions for efficient use of resources and
real results for children and women.
22. The impact of climate change in Chad is still unfolding and therefore not yet
fully understood. The Government and development partners need to be prepared to
adopt innovative strategies to respond to its unpredictable variables.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programme

Child survival and development

Regular
resources

Other resources

Total

17 885

49 200

67 085

Basic education and gender parity

7 500

10 000

17 500

Child protection

7 500

10 000

17 500

Strategic communication

6 250

6 250

12 500

Social policies, planning, monitoring and
evaluation

6 250

6 250

12 500

Humanitarian action and emergency
response

2 500

5 000

7 500

Cross-sectoral costs

8 700

8 300

17 000

56 585

95 000

151 585

Total

Preparation process
23. The country programme is the result of a systematic participatory process that
included comprehensive internal reviews and formal and informal exchange with
the Government and other partners. These discussions shaped the thematic and
geographical contour of the new programme and ensured alignment with national
priorities as well as the United Nations Development Assistance Framework

6

(UNDAF). The drafting committee emphasized mainstreaming key principles, such
as human rights, gender and equity approaches. To guide the preparation of the
programme, a new situation analysis was undertaken in 2010. In consultation with
the Government, six focus areas were identified, and thematic working groups were
constituted. Each group prepared a short strategic note that was used to guide the
structured discussion with partners to elaborate each of the components. The draft
CPD was shared with the Government and other partners, and has been updated to
reflect their feedback.
Programme and component results and strategies
24. The programme will contribute to achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the priorities of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan,
the Chad poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) and the UNDAF (2012-2015).
The programme aims to achieve the following objectives by 2016:
(a) Increase the rate of prenatal and post-natal consultations to 50 per cent
and 25 per cent, respectively;
(b) Improve the vaccination coverage for children aged 12 to 23 months to
80 per cent;
(c) Reduce the prevalence of global and severe acute malnutrition to under
12 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively;
(d) Increase access to potable water to 60 per cent, the percentage of the
population using appropriate sanitation to 25 per cent and the adoption of proper
hygiene practices to 30 per cent;
(e) Increase the proportion of young women (15-24 years old) with correct
knowledge of HIV transmission and prevention to 70 per cent; and the proportion
of HIV-positive pregnant women and children with access to anti-retroviral drugs to
80 per cent;
(f) Increase the net school enrolment rate to 70 per cent, the completion ra te
to 60 per cent, the parity index to 0.95 and the percentage of children in the first
year of primary school who attended preschool the year before to 8 per cent;
(g) Increase the percentage of children with a birth certificate to 50 per cent;
increase the percentage of demobilized children who benefit from adequate
protection and are reintegrated into society to 100 per cent; and decrease the
percentage of women (15-49 years old) who approve of female genital cutting
practices to 25 per cent.
25. The cross-sectoral components aim to enhance the data, analysis and evidence
base on the situation of women and children to support policy engagement and
advocacy, undertake measures for key behavioural changes, implement a gendersensitive social protection programme and ensure essential services for women and
children affected by conflict or emergencies.
26. The following strategies will support the achievement of programme and
component results:
(a) Reinforce regular development programming, aligned with stated
national goals and priorities, to improve equitable coverage of high-impact

7

evidence-based basic interventions, particularly focused on vulnerable and
marginalized women and children;
(b) Increase focus on targeted, simple interventions, using cross-sectoral
integration, synergies and innovative approaches, to ensure sustained delivery of
services. The goal is to enhance equity and reach vulnerable and marginalized
groups, including people living in areas affected by conflict or emergencies as well
as girls and nomadic people;
(c) Adjust geographical positioning to ensure balanced field presence and
increased focus on high-risk regions in the Sahel belt, including the four regions in
the east known as ‘recovery zones’, and selected regions in the south with high
inequality;
(d) Continue the focus on humanitarian action within the framework of
early recovery and durable solutions for people living in areas affected by conflict;
(e) Provide dedicated and institutionalized resources for emergency
preparedness and response to deal with chronic hunger and food insecurity,
recurring disease outbreaks and natural disasters;
(f) Increase emphasis on innovative solutions and testing of cross-sectoral,
evidence-based strategies based on human rights, gender and community
empowerment approaches, including community-led total sanitation and a gendersensitive social protection programme.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The key results and strategies of the country programme are fully aligned with
the stated national priorities and goals as enumerated in the Chad PRSP 3 (in
process) and UNDAF (2012-15). The programme will contribute to three UNDAF
strategic intervention axes: (a) a favourable environment for economic growth,
including allocation of resources and development of social sector policies and
strategies; (b) support for governance; and (c) support for human capital, including
for basic social services.
Relationship to international priorities
28. The key results of the country programme are fully aligned with the
objectives and targets of the Millennium Development Goals. The programme
focus areas and strategies are also consistent with the medium-term strategic plan
(2006-2013) focus areas and strategies. The programme strategies are tailored to
ensure renewed focus on results for the most vulnerable and marginalized groups of
women and children. They are also closely linked with relevant articles of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and other international agreements and
protocols on the rights of women and children.
Programme components
29. Child survival and development. This component will bring together the
health, nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and HIV/AIDS sub components. It will mainstream interventions to build synergy and improve
efficiency and results for the most vulnerable and marginalized women and
children. Integration and geographic convergence are expected to improve

8

equitable access to and coverage of a set of proven, high-impact and cost-effective
interventions.
30. Health. This sub-component will implement the Accelerated Child Survival
and Development Strategy and its three elements, expanded programme on
immunization (EPI+), antenatal care (ANC+) and integrated management of
childhood illness (IMCI+). The EPI+ element will be reinforced by strengthening
the cold chain and logistics facilities, investing in building the capacity of
government health personnel on EPI management, improving programme
monitoring and adopting the Reaching Every District approach.
31. To support polio eradication, UNICEF will further expand the social
mobilization and communication campaign. ANC+ services will include a focus on
critical post-natal care. Emphasis will be placed on strengthening the capacities of
families and communities to improve care practices at home. Malaria treatment will
be included in the IMCI+ package, and treatment of neonatal sepsis and pneumonia
will be introduced using community health workers. The programme will use both
fixed site and service-bundling approaches to improve efficiency by delivering
multiple high-impact interventions at the same time. The programme will also use
new approaches, such as mobile clinics in targeted areas to reach the unreached and
cash transfers for identified groups of vulnerable women to increase use of key
maternal and child health services.
32. Nutrition. This sub-component will seek to improve the nutritional status of
under-5 children and pregnant and lactating women. The treatment of se vere acute
malnutrition will be strengthened by increasing the number of nutritional centres
and the quality of care. Key family practices will be promoted, with emphasis on
exclusive breastfeeding during the first 6 months and appropriate complementary
feeding practices. A nutritional surveillance system will be established and the
institutional capacities of the National Nutritional and Food Technology Centre will
be strengthened. Efforts against micronutrient deficiencies will combine
supplementation, targeted distribution of fortified food, universal salt iodization
and promotion of diversified diets in several vulnerable communities.
33. WASH. This sub-component will support the development and
operationalization of the national water, sanitation and hygiene policy. The
programme will seek to improve equitable access to safe water and basic sanitation
services while promoting hygiene through sustainable and cost-effective
approaches. Specific attention will be given to ensuring access to safe water and
sanitation services by vulnerable groups, and in settings such as primary schools
and health and nutrition centres. The capacities of local partners will be
strengthened for delivery, monitoring and maintenance of services. Interventions
such as manual borehole drilling, community-led total sanitation and hand-washing
will be scaled up.
34. HIV/AIDS. This sub-component aims to scale up PMTCT services and
improve the knowledge and ability of young people to practise safe behaviour. To
ensure quality of PMTCT services, the programme will provide a regular supply of
consumables, support capacity building, monitor service delivery and support
community mobilization. Emphasis will be placed on synergies between
interventions in maternal health and PMTCT services. Paediatric HIV/AIDS care
services will be strengthened. Interventions aimed at youth will be further
expanded.

9

35. Basic education and gender parity. This component will focus on primary
school enrolment and retention, especially among girls and children belonging to
marginalized groups. The programme will also support interventions aimed at the
physical, cognitive and psychological development of children aged 2 to 5 years
and strengthen the community based Essential Learning Package for parental
education.
36. Social mobilization and behaviour change communication will be used to
increase demand for education, and micro-planning will give targeted support to the
education of girls and vulnerable groups. An analysis of obstacles will be carried
out to determine demand and supply-side obstacles to guide policies. The childfriendly school strategy will be strengthened and efforts will be made to ensure
increase government ownership for sustained action.
37. The programme will support training of community teachers. It will provide
teaching and learning materials for teachers and students and work to strengthen
institutional capacities for effective management of the education system. The
programme will also contribute to the development of integrated interventions
making use of community approaches to strengthen child survival and
development.
38. Child protection. This component will contribute to strengthening of the
protective environment for vulnerable children, including those affected by armed
conflict and faced with or at risk of sexual or gender-based violence. It will seek to
strengthen the national legal protection framework and institutional mechanisms.
Key strategies will include policy advocacy and follow-up support for birth
registration; institutionalization of the programme for transitional care and
rehabilitation of children associated with armed forces and groups; and the
campaign against sexual and gender-based violence.
39. As head of the task force established through United Nations Security Council
resolution 1612, UNICEF will continue its efforts to monitor and report on the six
grave violations against children. An awareness campaign on the risks of mines and
unexploded ordnance will be carried out and victims will be supported in thei r
rehabilitation. As part of the reinforced efforts to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence, the programme will focus on reducing female genital cutting, early and/or
forced marriages, and domestic violence. The programme will contribute to
documentation of these phenomena and development of implementation strategies.
It will also undertake behaviour change communication and ensure care and
support to victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
40. Strategic communication. This cross-sectoral component will strive to
ensure capacity building for national institutions and other key stakeholders,
including communities and civil society organizations.
41. External relations and advocacy. This sub-component will work to enhance
programme documentation and visibility and to expand strategic partnerships and
alliances. Such partnerships will include the media to increase the visibility of key
development priorities and aid in raising resources.
42. Communication for development. This sub-component will be based on five
axes: (a) behaviour change communication; (b) social mobilization; (c) partnerships
with the private sector and civil society; (d) media relations; and (e) interpersonal
communication. The programme will help to improve key individual, family an d

10

community behaviours. It will focus on increasing the coverage of routine and
polio immunization, use of ORS/zinc for treatment of diarrhoea, exclusive
breastfeeding, hand-washing, girls’ education, birth registration and prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence.
43. Social policies, planning, monitoring and evaluation. This cross-sectoral
component has two separate sub-components.
44. Social policy. This sub-component will support complementary interventions
aimed at using human rights advocacy, women’s empowerment and community
approaches to improve girls’ education and reduce maternal mortality. The focus on
social protection is guided by the growing body of evidence suggesting that broadbased action looking beyond immediate causes is needed to address issues like
maternal and child mortality.
45. This initiative is also supported by four distinct country features: (a) a
concentrated revenue base (two thirds of revenue comes from oil); (b) widespread
poverty and top-down inequality; (c) the country’s reported budget surplus and
fiscal space, implying that resources could be available to support investment for
social protection measures; and (d) the need for evidence-based interventions in
view of the country’s institutional and structural weaknesses.
46. Strategic programme elements will include (a) development of policy and
institutional framework; (b) improved data gathering and analysis to guide
programme design; (c) detailed feasibility study and piloting of three to four social
protection interventions; (d) evidence synthesis and documentation and
dissemination of piloting experiences and results; (e) policy engagement, advocacy
and follow-up support for adoption of a gender-sensitive national social protection
programme; and (f) technical and management assistance, monitoring and partial
financial support for phased implementation of the selected interventions.
47. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. This sub-component will strengthen the
collection and analysis of data. This will create a strong evidence base to support
policy advocacy and strategic planning for efficient implementation of key
interventions. The main strategies will include technical support for the use of
results-based planning and management tools in developing national plans. The
programme will also support micro-planning at decentralized levels for key
interventions. The monitoring and evaluation functions will seek to increase the
availability of disaggregated data on the situation of women and children, with a
focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized. National monitoring and evaluation
capacities will be strengthened, as will the internal country office capacity. In
addition, the programme will spend about 7 per cent of total programmable
resources to support monitoring and evaluation functions, including sectoral and
cross-sectoral surveys, studies and evaluations.
48. Humanitarian action and emergency response. This cross-sectoral
component will contribute to anticipating, preparing for and responding to
humanitarian and emergency situations.
49. Humanitarian action. This sub-component will support the continuation of
basic survival and development services and protection measures for women and
children in areas affected by conflict. Together with partners, the programme will
support the implementation of the interventions outlined in the National

11

Programme for Early Recovery in the East, and other measures aimed at sustained
and durable solutions for the people living in the recovery zones.
50. Emergency response. This sub-component will help to strengthen institutional
and community capacities to prevent and mitigate emergency risks by improving
preparedness and an effective response system. An updated early warning/early
action system will be put in place to guide it. Institutionalizing emergency response
will ensure improved and coordinated action and synergy between routine
programming and emergency response activities.
Major partnerships
51. Given the well-documented structural and institutional weakness of the
country, UNICEF will further expand partnerships to strengthen policy engagement
and advocacy, programme management and monitoring and oversight, particularly
for interventions aimed at vulnerable and marginalized women and children.
Collaborations with key government ministries and departments will be further
strengthened at both national and decentralized levels. Similarly, collaboration with
United Nations agencies will be reinforced to build synergy, avoid duplication and
ensure coordinated response. More focus will be given to strengthening
partnerships with key international financial institutions, including the African
Development Bank, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The
programme will strengthen partnerships with the bilateral institutions in Chad.
Efforts will be made to expand partnerships with other key nations represented by
embassies or offices in Cameroon. The programme will continue to associate with
international and local non-governmental organizations, including community- and
faith-based groups and the private sector where possible.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
52. Overall programme management, monitoring and evaluation will be a joint
responsibility of the Government of Chad and UNICEF. This will involve periodic
analysis of the situation of women and children using reliable, disaggregated data,
use of programme implementation and monitoring data on the key indicators
outlined in the summary results matrix, and sectoral analyses, assessments and
evaluations led or supported by UNICEF, as part of the Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan. In addition, annual work plans will be developed in consultation
with the Government and partners for each of the six programme components,
which will be used for formal programme reviews quarterly and annually. A
midterm review will be organized in 2014. Towards the end of the programme (in
2014/2015) multiple indicator cluster survey 5 will provide the nationwide
household data that will be used for the overall programme evaluation. In addition,
the programme will benefit from the use of relevant data and analysis from other
United Nations agencies and partner organizations.

12

