Chile
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Chile
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.15) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

†

Basic data
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

4.7

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

9

Underweight a (per cent, moderate and severe, 2006) b
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2007)

1
c

Primary school enrolment (per cent net, male/female, 2007)

18
95/94

Primary schoolchildren completing final primary grade (per cent, 2006)

95

Use of improved drinking water sources (per cent, 2008)

96

Use of improved sanitation facilities (per cent, 2008)

96

Adult HIV prevalence rate (per cent)

0.4

Child work (per cent, children 5-14 years old, 2003)

3

Birth registration (per cent, under 5 years, 2007)
GNI per capita (US$)

99
9 460

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (per cent)

97

One-year-olds immunized against measles (per cent)

96

†
a
b
c

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women is available at www.childinfo.org/.
(NCHS/WHO) reference population.
0-71 months.
26 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see: http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Database.
1

The situation of children and women
1.
Chile, which is an upper-middle-income country and a member of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), has made
significant progress in guaranteeing children’s rights. It has an estimated population
of 17,094,270 persons (50.50 per cent women and 49.49 per cent men), 13 per cent
of whom live in rural areas. The 2002 Census projects a reduction in the number of
children under 15 years of age (18.7 per cent in 2030). The population density is
2
low: 22.17 persons/km , with a high concentration in the capital.
2.
Most families are two-parent nuclear families, while 26 per cent are one-parent
families and 33.1 per cent are female-headed households (2009). The number of
households with children has declined (54.6 per cent in 2009) and the fertility rate
has fallen (2.0 children per woman). The proportion of children born outside
marriage has increased (58.4 per cent).
3.
Women’s labour force participation has required the implementation of
policies for a more equitable distribution of household tasks and child -rearing
__________________
1

2

For reasons of space, the word “children” is used throughout this document to refer to “boys,
girls and adolescents”. In some places, the words “boys”, “girls”, “adolescents”, “sons” and
“daughters” are used separately to refer to the particular situation of those subgroups.

between men and women. Working days and time spent on transport have reduced
the quality of life of families.
4.
Poverty affects 15.1 per cent of the population (2009); children are the most
affected (24.5 per cent of children under the age of 3 years, and 21.5 per cent of
children aged between 4 and 17 years). Of children aged from 0 to 5 years, 41.3 per
cent of those living in urban areas attend school, compared to just 26.4 per cent in
rural areas.
5.
The importance attached to early childhood has resulted in: (a) an integrated
policy that focuses on pregnancy, childbirth and the postpartum period for women
attending public health facilities; (b) improved services for children in general and
for those with developmental delays in particular; (c) more extensive coverage for
early education. There is still inequity in access to nurseries and kindergartens, and
there is no system to guarantee the quality of services provided. Information on the
results and impact of programmes remains scarce.
6.
Net enrolment rates are high for primary and secondary education (93.2 per
cent and 70.7 per cent, respectively). There is an extensive network of safe school
buildings, with educational equipment, computers and electronic connectivity, while
92.5 per cent of teachers have a university education. Most children in need receive
textbooks and meals at school. Chile has increased the level of spending per pupil
and the allocation of resources to education for the most vulnerable children.
7.
In 2010, the Government of Chile approved some reforms to ensure q uality
and equity in education, which include: (a) curriculum changes intended to improve
results in reading, writing and mathematics; (b) greater incentives for the best
students to consider a teaching career; (c) incentives for teachers to retire; and
(d) incentives for performance. Pending issues in this area are: (a) socioeconomic
segregation of students, which results in stratification and inequitable distribution of
opportunities; (b) inadequate results in standardized tests; (c) problems with the
classroom atmosphere and with the school environment.
8.
According to the National Survey on Child Labour (2003), 196,000 children
aged between 5 and 17 years were employed in paid work and over 50 per cent of
them worked in occupations in which their rights were violated. Of the children who
worked, 53.7 per cent did not attend school, and those who did had performance
issues.
9.
Children’s participation remains limited. School is the primary forum for
participation; civil society entities have organized chi ldren’s congresses, parliaments
and councils, but the turnout has been low. According to various surveys, about
37 per cent of adolescents participate in organizations.
10. By 2008, 20,099 cases of HIV/AIDS had been recorded, and by 2007,
6,102 persons had died of the disease. The main group affected is adults between the
ages of 20 and 39 years, mostly men. In 87.6 per cent of cases, exposure to the virus
was through sexual contact. In men, exposure through homosexual and bisexual
activity accounted for 54.4 per cent of cases. At present, the level of heterosexual
exposure is increasing.
11. In the most recent census, 4.6 per cent of the population declared themselves
as belonging to one of the country’s seven indigenous peoples (the Mapuche account
for 87.3 per cent of indigenous persons and are concentrated in the Araucanía region
and in Santiago). Of indigenous children, 26.5 per cent are living below the poverty
line. Despite the ratification of Convention No. 169 of the International Labour

3

Organization (ILO) and the initiative for constitutional reform in that area,
commitments for compliance with the obligation to protect and promote the rights
and freedoms of indigenous peoples are still pending.
12. According to the Ministry of the Interior, 35.7 p er cent of women have
suffered some kind of violence from a partner (2008). According to the third study
on child abuse (UNICEF, 2006), 75 per cent of children are victims of some kind of
physical or psychological violence in their homes. There are no sign ificant
differences by gender. No statistics are available on the abuse of minors under the
age of six years. According to studies carried out by the Ministry of the Interior,
7 per cent of children have suffered some kind of sexual abuse (3.3 boys and
12. 8 per cent girls). Public policies and legal reforms against violence have been
implemented, including the Domestic Violence Act and the Sexual Offences Act.
13. In 2010, 64,812 children received care from the National Service for Minors
(SENAME). Of this total, 11,272 were under 5 years of age and 12,999 were not
living with their families. The number of children placed in institutions needs to be
reduced; centres and programmes for the reintegration of adolescent offenders must
be improved, as well as the capacities of family and criminal courts. There are child
protection programmes and criminal penalties for adolescents aged between 14 and
18 years, but there is a need to reform their contents and the structure of SENAME.
The legislation on minors should also be amended in order to ensure comprehensive
protection of children’s rights and establish an independent institution to protect
children’s rights, in accordance with the recommendation made by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child in 2007.
14. There are 12,797 adolescent offenders who are subject to penalties or
precautionary measures (9.5 per cent are girls and 90.5 per cent are boys). The
criminal justice system for minors has some shortcomings: (a) high levels of
temporary detention and an increase in the numbers of sentences involving prison
terms; (b) there is no national statistical system shared by all stakeholders and there
are no indicators regarding the rights of adolescent offenders; (c) there is no
national torture prevention mechanism with full autonomy to monitor juvenile
centres; (d) lack of specialized training for those working in the system; (e) poor
state of centres and low level of training of the teams responsible for them;
(f) limited inter-agency coordination to ensure reintegration into society; and
(g) lack of special programmes for adolescents members of vulnerable groups (girls,
immigrants, refugees, indigenous women and sexual orientation minorities).
15. Immigration flows from neighbouring countries are increasing. In 2009 there
were 352,344 legal immigrants (15 per cent under the age of 15 years). Chile also
receives refugees. Immigration policy does not adequately address the needs of
children who are non-nationals and there are no specialized public institutions to
defend their rights before administrative or legal bodies, which impedes their access
to health and education services.
16. Children who live in poverty, commit crimes or have learning difficulties are
increasingly stereotyped and stigmatized. The mass media, public debate and society
should recognize children as subjects of rights and as members of a group that must
be protected. Children’s opinions on matters that affect them should be heard and
they should not be presented as a source of problems relatin g to labour and sexual
offences, or as a group entity that is incapable and passive. Chile can promote
change and improve the level of consideration and respect given to children by the
mass media, social networks, private sector entities, families, the ed ucational system
and institutions that have contact with children.

4

17. One of the central elements of Chile’s foreign policy is cooperation on issues
of institutional, educational, environmental, cultural, scientific and technological
development. Opportunities for horizontal cooperation are enhanced by the
country’s greater level of development compared to the rest of the region. Chilean
experiences may be of use to other countries, while Chile can also learn from other
countries’ experiences.
18. The earthquake and tsunami that occurred on 27 February 2010 are the most
severe natural disasters of recent times; they damaged much of the country’s social
and productive infrastructure. The Government estimated the loss of infrastructure
at 20 per cent of GDP. The emergency situation caused a weakening of the social
fabric in the areas affected and increased the vulnerability of children and women.
The challenge remains: the persons affected still need to overcome their
vulnerability.

Results and lessons learned from the 2005-2011
cooperation programme
Results
19. UNICEF provided technical assistance for the establishment of a new social
protection system for early childhood and advised the Presidential Council that
designed it. UNICEF supported the implementation of that policy by creating
materials on pregnancy and parenting skills that are culturally relevant to the
indigenous population. It also provided technical support for intersectoral
coordination, as well as innovative initiatives for early chi ldhood stimulation and
work with families, in line with the national policy.
20. UNICEF provided support for the Ministry of Education in its initiative to
introduce indigenous languages in schools in areas where over 50 per cent of the
population is indigenous and has provided technical support for the preparation of
materials and the design of a monitoring system.
21. Through UNICEF, the intercultural perspective of institutional practices and
programmes for children in Araucanía has been strengthened. U NICEF has
collaborated with the Carabineros de Chile (national police force) to include the
issues of children’s rights, indigenous rights and the promotion of an intercultural
approach in its continuous education programme.
22. During the parliamentary review of the Adolescent Criminal Responsibility
Act, UNICEF identified and publicized the Act’s shortcomings. The final version
contained amendments to the wording which included the elimination of measures
involving detention without due process. UNICEF is a member of the supervisory
commissions for detention centres for minors; the organization has participated to a
significant degree in the amendment of the Counter-Terrorism Act and the Military
Justice Act and was successful in ensuring that the provisio ns of these Acts were not
applied to minors under the age of 18 years.
23. As for horizontal cooperation, UNICEF has supported: (a) the sharing of
experiences and information at the First Latin American Regional Conference on
Birth Registration and the Right to Identity and at the signing of an agreement
between Chile and Paraguay; (b) collaboration with the Diego Portales University,
where 13 specialization courses were organized for judges, prosecutors and defence
lawyers, with the participation of professionals from Latin America and the

5

Caribbean and from Africa; and (c) the preparation of a study on child abuse in the
family in Paraguay.
Lessons learned
24. During implementation of the 2005-2011 cooperation programme, technical
assistance and promotional efforts made by UNICEF were key factors for the
promulgation of the Adolescent Criminal Responsibility Act, the creation of
supervision mechanisms for detention centres for minors and progress towards
specialization in the legal system.
25. A number of strategies were combined: (a) give visibility to the disparities that
affect indigenous children; (b) make the voice of UNICEF heard in defence of the
rights of children, although doing so may lead to disagreements with some
institutions; (c) formulate working strategies for the medium and long term;
(d) formulate exit strategies for the time when institutions take over leadership of
the interventions supported by UNICEF; and (e) include monitoring and follow -up
activities. This combination of strategies has been indispensable for achieving
results and forming alliances with counterpart government departments and civil
society and academic entities.
26. Work at the subnational level, directed at the poorest quintile of the
population, who live in the regions with the lowest development indicators
(especially indigenous children), facilitated the development of initiatives from an
intercultural perspective.
27. The sharing of information on good practices and the dissemination of
experiences between Chile and other countries have opened new prospects for
modalities of cooperation on issues relating to children.
28. The focused actions of UNICEF to protect children during the emergency
following the earthquake has contributed to raising awareness of the impo rtance of
having mechanisms and systems in place to protect the rights of children during
emergency situations.

2012-2016 cooperation programme
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Equity and inclusion
Protection of children
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 750

3 250

5 000

900

2 500

3 400

1 100

2 250

3 350

3 750

8 000

11 750

Programme preparation process
29. The components of the 2012-2016 cooperation programme are based on:
(a) the major results and experience gained during the preceding Programme; (b) the

6

observations and recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
(c) the programmatic priorities established in accordance with the Government and
following consultations with representatives from civil society, academia and the
private sector, and parliamentarians; (d) the joint work and programme priorities
established with United Nations agencies during the process of preparing the
common country assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF).
Programme components, goals, results and strategies
30. The goal of the Programme for Cooperation 2012-2016 is to support the
country in progressively developing its capacity to improve the situation of
children’s rights and ensuring that by 2016, all children in the country can exercise
their rights on an equitable and equal basis.
31.

The expected results are:

(a) Children experience a greater degree of social inclusion, have access to
opportunities for development and quality services, and are heard, thus contributing
to closing the gap between the poorest quintile and richest quintile of the
population;
(b) Children develop in a culture of tolerance and acceptance of diversity
(with regard to ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation and disability);
(c) Children have access to institutions that provide comprehensive
protection of their rights, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
32. The strategies to achieve both programme objectives will be to: (a) promote
institutional and legislative reforms; (b) follow up on such reforms to ensure that
they are in line with international human rights treaties; (c) monitor the living
conditions of the most marginalized children and design and implement relevant
public policies; (d) build the capacity of counterpart government agencies and key
officials at the national and subnational level; (e) create opportunities for
participation and consultation with adolescents; (f) raise awareness of and improve
the visibility of violations of children’s rights through communications work,
including within emergency response efforts and in activities that promote equity to
foster inclusion; (g) coordinate closely with United Nations agencies, research
centres, the media, civil society organizations, the private sector and faith -based
groups; (h) establish partnerships aimed at making the Convention on the Rights of
the Child a corporate social responsibility commitment; (i ) exchange information
with other countries on the best practices to benefit children.
33. The 2012-2016 cooperation programme will include the following two
programme components:
(a)

Equity and inclusion;

(b)

Protection of children.

Equity and inclusion
34. National indicators are among the best in the region. However, two issues
hamper the full exercise of children’s rights:

7

(a) Socio-economic, ethnic and territorial conditions affect the degree to
which excluded groups are able to exercise their economic and social rights;
(b) Paternalistic and authoritarian attitudes that do not recognize children as
rights bearers pervade society’s views of children and adolescents.
35. The programme component established under area 1 of the UNDAF aims to
support Government actions to strengthen institutional capacity at the national,
regional and local level in order to reduce inequity in social development and
increase social inclusion. This component will focus on the regions and districts in
the country presenting indicators that suggest problems in the exercise of the rights
of the child. Actions will focus on advocating respect for such rights among the
poorest quintile of the population and providing quality technical assistance to
develop inclusive public policies.
36. In the area of education and child development, UNICEF will support changes
in oversight in order to ensure high quality early childhood services and to include
indicators on coexistence, participation and comprehensive development in the
system for educational quality assurance. Follow-up work will be conducted at early
childhood development centres to help overcome the gaps between children in the
poorest districts and the richest districts, as manifested in developmental delays,
weak results in standardized tests and other performance indicators. UNICEF will
improve access to preschool education and contribute to the development of an
educational inclusion policy to eliminate secondary school dropout by promoting
reintegration through education and the eradication of child labour. It is expected
that by 2016, knowledge of the weaknesses in early education and development in
early childhood will have improved and serve as a basis for developing policy.
Broader access to preschool education and a reduction in school dropouts,
particularly among adolescent girls, is also expected by 2016.
37. In order to work towards the inclusion of indigenous children, UNICEF will
promote greater diversity in the school system and provide technical assistance to
counterpart officials for strengthening the cultural relevance of policies on children
through the use of intercultural standards to formulate and revise tools and
practices. Capacity-building will also be offered to government officials, including
police officers, and a continuous training programme on children’s rights and
intercultural perspectives will be established. Partnerships with the criminal justice
system of the Araucanía region will be strengthened, and Mapuche organizations
and those of other indigenous groups will receive support for their participation in
the protection of children’s rights.
38. UNICEF will support the Government and civil society organizations in
promoting and conducting innovative activities that promote adolescent
participation in the education system and other contexts, including strengthening
mechanisms that recognize their opinions.
39. UNICEF will support the Government in its initiatives to strengthen the family
and its role in supporting children’s development in all areas. This includes
promoting respect for the interests and rights of children, fostering good treatment
of children and strengthening participation of families in school governance.
40. UNICEF will support the establishment of partnerships with privat e sector
institutions in order to integrate respect for children’s rights within their corporate
social responsibility commitments. UNICEF will also expand its collaboration with
the media in order to influence its messages concerning the recognition of children

8

as dynamic forces in society who are worthy of respect and bear rights. Knowledge
of these issues will be enhanced by requesting children’s own opinions.
41. UNICEF will support Government actions to obtain and improve knowledge
on the situation of children’s rights in Chile and other countries.
Child protection
42. The process of bringing legislation and policy in line with the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child has been initiated. Changes have been made
to laws and policies ranging from guardianship issues to comprehensive protection,
yet society’s views of children and adolescents make it clear that paternalistic and
authoritarian attitudes prevail and are expressed in acts of violence and deprivation
of liberty and in the lack of participation mechanisms. There are still some social
policies which establish institutional guardianship as the primary measure to protect
children whose rights have been violated.
43.

This component will focus on three critical issues:
(a)

Improving mechanisms for the guarantee and respect of children’s rights;

(b) Bringing the national legal and institutional framework in line with
international treaties;
(c)

Reducing the levels of family and institutional violence against children.

44. UNICEF will promote the establishment of systems to continuously monitor
respect for children’s rights; carry out activities to promote children’s rights; and
strengthen national and local capacity to ensure that such rights are guaranteed and
respected. UNICEF will provide technical assistance for the preparation of national
statistics on the criminal justice system for minors, which serve as indicators of
whether adolescent offenders are able to exercise their rights effectively. Technical
assistance will also help to identify the needs of the most vulnerable children and
introduce innovations into subnational efforts to prevent violations of children’s
rights and protect children. The following results are expected for 2016:
(a) establishment of an independent, inter-agency system for oversight of detention
centres for minors; (b) an increase in the number of alternative penalties to
deprivation of liberty; and (c) establishment and strengthening of diverse
subnational programmes to promote and protect children’s rights.
45. UNICEF will provide technical support to counterpart officials and agencies
on: (a) reforming the system to create two distinct institutions, one to protect
children, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Planning, and the other to serve
the criminal justice system, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice;
(b) drafting an act on the comprehensive protection of children’s rights ;
(c) increasing public regulations and institutions for the promotion and protection of
children’s rights; and (d) establishing an effective specialized criminal justice
system for adolescents (ages 14-18). UNICEF will also support analysis and
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, including: (a) establishing legislation that prohibits and penalizes all forms of
corporal punishment; (b) creating an independent institution to advocate for
children’s rights; and any other recommendations issued by the Committee in its
future reports on Chile.
46. The following results are expected by 2016: (a) establishment of institutions
for rights protection and criminal accountability in line with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child; (b) reduction in the institutionalization and detention of

9

children; (c) increase in the provision of family counselling and support;
(d) increase in the social reintegration rates for adolescent offenders.
47. UNICEF will collaborate with national institutions to strengthen their capacity
to reduce the rates of child abuse. The fourth Study of Child Abuse will be prepared.
The following results are expected by 2016: (a) establishment of women’s help
centres and shelters that offer prevention programmes to help children from families
that have experienced violence; (b) implementation of proto cols to address child
sexual abuse, ill treatment and gender-based violence; and (c) establishment of
mechanisms to prevent sexual abuse in schools.
48. UNICEF will strive to strengthen the country’s capacity to protect
non-national children (immigrants, asylum-seekers, refugees and victims of
international trafficking), particularly in terms of their rights to protection, health,
education, nationality and family reunification. UNICEF will support the collection
of information for the design of adequate public policies to integrate these children
into Chilean society. Support will be offered in creating a regulatory framework that
guarantees that non-national children are included in the system for comprehensive
protection of children.
49. UNICEF will support Government efforts at emergency preparedness,
including ensuring that the rights of all children living in Chile are respected and
guaranteed in emergency situations. It will also support Government efforts to
communicate successful experiences with policies on children and adolescents, as
well as Government initiatives to gather information on the experience of other
countries in guaranteeing and protecting children’s rights.
Relationship of the Programme to national priorities and areas of cooperation in
the UNDAF 2011-2014
50. The Programme for Cooperation was prepared in consultation with the major
counterpart agencies of UNICEF and is in line with the common country assessment
and the activities of United Nations agencies as described in the UNDAF. The
following issues were considered when drafting the Programme: (a) Government
needs in terms of support to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs);
(b) the results of the UNDAF evaluation; and (c) the need to coordinate with the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) to avoid
duplication of efforts.
Relationship of the Programme to international priorities
51. The Programme for Cooperation 2012-2016 is in line with the MDGs, in
particular with regard to reducing poverty, guaranteeing universal primary
education, preventing maternal and infant mortality and preventing HIV/AIDS. The
Programme follows closely the priorities established in the UNICEF medium -term
strategic plan for 2006-2013: the first component of the Programme is in line with
focus areas 1, 2 and 5 of the plan, and the second component is in line with focus
areas 4 and 5.
52. Preparations of the Programme for Cooperation gave special consideration to
the recommendations issued in 2002 and 2007 by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child, Convention No. 169 of the International Labour Organization (ILO)
(Convention concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries)
and the Educational Goals for 2021 agreed to by the Organization of

10

Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture (OEI) at the twentieth
Ibero-American Summit.
Cross-sectoral costs
53. The costs of the Programme, support staff and technical assistance, including
costs involving more than one programme component, will be covered, in addition
to UNICEF expenses related to Programme implementation and planning, follow -up
and evaluation activities.
Major partnerships
54. UNICEF will maintain and strengthen its current partnerships with counterpart
government agencies, centres of expertise, civil society and non-governmental
organizations, faith-based organizations, the media and private sector institutions.
Activities will be closely coordinated with ECLAC, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),
the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO)/World Health Organization (WHO),
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and ILO. The
primary programme counterparts will be the Ministries of Planning, Justice, Health,
Women and Education. UNICEF will maintain its cooperation agreements with the
Carabineros de Chile, the Office of the Public Prosecutor, the Office of the
Ombudsman, the Congress and the Supreme Court. In addition, UNICEF will
maintain its official relationship with the Government via the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
55. Upon initiating the Programme for Cooperation, UNICEF and its counterparts
will gather a set of basic reference data on the status of children’s rights among the
poorest quintile of the population in approximately 10 per cent of the country’s
districts. This will facilitate the measurement of progress in this group in relation to
the rest of the country. The UNICEF Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will
guide Programme monitoring and evaluation.
56. Chile is a member, along with other countries, of the Southern Cone
Processing Centre, which conducts administrative, financial and human resources
management activities. It is an efficient structure which generates savings in
operational costs.
57. In order to facilitate local fundraising, UNICEF, in its capacity as an entity of
the United Nations, signed a revision to the Basic Cooperation Agreement with the
Government of Chile, which is currently mutually in force. The tax benefits afforded
for donating to social causes, as provided in Chilean legislation, may now be
afforded to persons and institutions that donate to UNICEF.

11

