E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
China
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for China is presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection basis. The
CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $38,535,000 from regular
resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $98,000,000 in other resources,
subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period 2016 to
2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

Programme rationale
1. China continues to grow economically and to expand its global role. With the world’s
second largest child population, China had an estimated 274 million children in 2013,
representing 20 per cent of the country’s total population and 14 per cent of the world’s
children.1 In recent years, increasing commitment by the Government to equitable growth
has generated tremendous progress in advancing the status of children: achievement of
universal access to primary education, promotion of gender equality, reduction of infant and
under-five mortality and poverty alleviation for urban and rural children. The Government
has introduced child-focused concepts into critical governance documents, including the 12th
National Five-Year Plan for Social and Economic Development (2011–2015), the Ten-Year
Poverty Reduction Programme and the National Post-Disaster Reconstruction Strategy. The
Government has also developed child-specific laws, policies and guidelines, such as the
National Plan of Action for Children (2011–2020). However, the implementation of childoriented laws and policies presents ongoing challenges, with the most vulnerable and
impoverished children often unable to access quality public services and specialized
programming.
2. Rapid urbanization and migration trends continue to impact geographic and regional
disparities, posing challenges to the survival, development and protection of millions of
vulnerable children. Between 2000 and 2011, the urban population rose from 36 per cent to
more than 50 per cent of the total population. More than 200 million people have migrated
to urban areas. With an estimated 36 million children migrating with their parents; 61 million
children have been left behind in rural areas without the care of one or both parents. Nearly
2 million of these children live alone.
3. Under the country’s system of hukou, a household registration is required to access
public services; children living outside their registration area may face obstacles to gaining
access. Moreover, many migrant children have inadequate and incomplete health insurance
and vaccination coverage, and are unable to attend public schools. In addition, the increased
tendency for older migrant children to enter the labour market leads to relatively higher dropout rates among migrant children.
4. An estimated 25 per cent of children live in poverty-affected areas. The poorest and
most disadvantaged children, confronted with multiple and overlapping inequalities,
disproportionately live in rural and ethnic minority areas in the country’s western regions,
which are mountainous and remote. In these areas, poor quality public health services and
access bottlenecks contribute to elevated under-five and infant mortality rates (IMRs).
Children in rural areas face nutritional deprivations, with the prevalence of underweight and
stunting in 2010 at 8 per cent and 20 per cent, respectively, compared with 1.3 per cent and
3.4 per cent for urban children. In education, overall enrolment rates are high: in 2013, net
enrolment in primary education was more than 99 per cent, and gross enrolment rates in
secondary education stood at 104 per cent and 86 per cent for the junior and senior levels,
respectively. However, the school attendance rate for secondary rural children is low, at
almost 60 per cent. The quality of education in rural areas is constrained by a lack of resources
and capacity. Access to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) is similarly lower in rural,
poor areas in western China, with 44 per cent of the population not using improved sanitation

1

2/18

All statistics are from the 2010 National Population Census or other national sources, unless otherwise
stated.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

facilities in 2012, compared with 26 per cent in urban areas (UNICEF and the World Health
Organization (WHO) Joint Monitoring Programme data).
5. There is growing attention to the issue of violence against children. In a 2005 UNICEFsupported survey, 55 per cent of respondents reported having experienced physical violence,
60 per cent reported having experienced psychological violence, and 26 per cent reported
having experienced sexual violence before the age of 16. A number of initiatives are under
way to ensure an environment that protects children from violence, abuse and exploitation,
through a social protection system that promotes children’s welfare.
6. Despite gains achieved, gender differentials persist. In 2012, the national sex ratio at
birth stood at 118 boys for every 100 girls. National census data for 2010 showed that the
IMR for girls exceeded that of boys. Sex differentials are also seen in other indicators. For
example, census data indicate that rural parents are more likely to bring their sons than
daughters with them to their place of migration, which results in only boys’ benefiting from
urban resources.
7. Promoting equity and reducing the disparities faced by children – between rural and
urban locations, boys and girls, across regions, among ethnic groups, and according to age
groups, disability and HIV status – is vital to ensuring the fulfilment of the rights of all
children, particularly the most disadvantaged.
8. China faces a range of recurrent and major natural disasters, including floods, drought
and earthquakes. Globally, China ranks among the countries suffering the greatest losses
from natural disasters, in terms of both fatalities and economic damages. Natural disasters
tend to have disproportionate and irreversible consequences, especially for children. During
the devastating Wenchuan Earthquake in 2008, a significant proportion of those who perished
were children. Moreover, psychosocial, social and economic shocks caused by disasters can
have lifelong impacts on children.
9. Major lessons have emerged from UNICEF current cooperation that are relevant to the
design of the new country programme. There has been validation of the critical relationship
between ‘downstream’ and ‘upstream’ engagement in the middle-income country context of
China, through the strategy of “from pilots to policy to results at scale”. UNICEF has a long
record of working with partners in China to contribute to the design of policies, standards
and guidelines for nationwide application, based on evidence collected from pilot activities
and technical studies. Key examples are the models developed of child-friendly spaces and
child-friendly schools, universal hospital delivery and early childhood development (ECD).
Once sound laws and policies are in place, pilot settings provide a critical venue to monitor
and analyse the barriers, bottlenecks and success factors in the equitable implementation of
policies, and identify the improvements, adaptations and capacity-building needed to ensure
that interventions reach the most disadvantaged populations.
10. A further lesson concerns the transition from sectoral, relatively vertically organized
interventions for children, to integrated, intersectoral approaches at the community level.
China has successfully developed national programmes to address critical needs such as for
rural water supply and HIV and AIDS. However, experience has demonstrated the
complexity of the conditions surrounding focused actions, and the potential to engage
multiple sectors in addressing the relevant bottlenecks and barriers affecting children.
Building on the current programme, opportunities are seen to incorporate actions for the
prevention of parent-to-child transmission (PPTCT) of HIV within maternal and child health
(MCH) and address HIV prevention along with other risky behaviours among adolescents;
and to focus on critical needs for gender-appropriate sanitation facilities and improved

3/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

hygiene practices in schools and health facilities. Combined efforts in nutrition and sanitation
are similarly seen to generate greater results for children than efforts in each area alone.
11. The country programme spans a range of sectors responding to the situation and needs
of Chinese children, strategically focusing on where the greatest value can be added through
the development of knowledge and evidence, and its use to support advocacy for effective
policies and their implementation in favour of children and vulnerable groups. The weight
and mix of technical work continue to evolve in the light of the country’s continuing rapid
economic and social development.
12. UNICEF cooperation, while limited in financial terms in relation to the country’s large
population, geographic size and resources, is designed in the light of the organization’s
demonstrated comparative advantage, complementary to national and other international
efforts. To make the greatest difference for children, UNICEF will continue to direct its
actions to:
(a)

Mobilize partners behind child rights, convene key actors and advocate for strengthened
policies and programmes for children, particularly the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable;

(b)

Support local action and pilot activities to inform the development and implementation
of new and strengthened policies, standards and guidelines;

(c)

Facilitate knowledge generation and dissemination, best practices and innovative
approaches;

(d)

Promote multisectoral approaches to addressing children’s needs; and

(e)

Support improved monitoring systems and evaluations.

13. UNICEF continues to prioritize equity and gender equality in all areas of cooperation.
In promoting the realization of rights for all children, particular focus is given to the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, including those living in poverty, ethnic minorities,
children affected by migration and children with disabilities. The programme will work
towards the elimination of gender discrimination and inequality at all levels, and for the
implementation of gender-sensitive approaches. These efforts will become even more visible
in the new country programme and will be mainstreamed in all areas of work.

Programme priorities and partnerships
14. The objective of the country programme is to increase the capacity of Government and
other partners for effective action for the fulfilment of the rights of children and women, in
the context of the National Plan of Action for Children (2011–2020) and in accordance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols adopted in 2000,
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The
country programme is aligned with relevant sectoral plans and with policies and programmes
at provincial and county level. It has been prepared in alignment with the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2016–2020 and the activities of sister United
Nations agencies. All programme components contribute to the three proposed UNDAF
outcomes, in particular to Outcome 1: “More people, particularly the vulnerable and
disadvantaged, enjoy improved living conditions and increased opportunities for economic,
social and cultural development.” The programme responds to the principles and elements of
the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014–2017.

4/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

15. UNICEF cooperation will focus on three strategic priorities, which will guide the main
thrust of its operational programmes, knowledge generation and advocacy:
(a)

Increasing access to public services, notably health, nutrition, HIV, WASH, education,
child protection and child welfare, particularly for the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged, including through promoting children’s right to an identity and system
strengthening.

(b)

Child-sensitive social protection and the eradication of multidimensional child poverty.

(c)

An integrated, intersectoral approach to early childhood development for children aged
0 to 3, with a focus on resource-poor settings.

16. These priorities will be pursued through an approach that emphasizes the reduction of
disparities in coverage and the benefits of services, through the identification of barriers and
bottlenecks to effective programme delivery and of actions to address them. The programme
is guided by a theory of change resting on (a) the generation of evidence from pilot activities
and wider knowledge to advocate for and inform the generation of strengthened policies,
standards and guidelines; and (b) support to the implementation of these measures to benefit
the most disadvantaged children, including through continued monitoring and feedback from
pilot activities.
17. The programme is structured into five components, each consisting of two outcomes,
as follows:
Health, nutrition and WASH
18. Within the framework of the Every Woman, Every Child initiative and related
international agreements and partnerships, as well as the recently developed national Child
Survival Strategy, this component aims to ensure that children and women, particularly the
most disadvantaged, benefit from high-impact, quality interventions at minimum cost.
Actions will provide demonstration experience and technical support towards (a) improved
national policies for child survival and development, guided by results from sound research
and monitoring systems; and (b) increased public demand for and access to services. Policy
emphasis will be given to MCH, including PPTCT of HIV, nutrition, immunization, child
injury prevention and sanitation and hygiene services, all of which will be supported by an
effective integrated health management information system. In the area of nutrition,
particular focus will be given to the promotion of breastfeeding, appropriate infant and young
child feeding and micronutrient supplementation. Integrated approaches will help to ensure
maximum synergies between health, nutrition, WASH and HIV interventions to achieve
results for children. Particularly in demonstration counties, the programme will focus on
increasing the relevant capacities of policymakers and service providers, and of communities
and families.
Education and child development
19. In alignment with the global strategy of Education for All and the Government of China
2010–2020 Education Plan for equity and quality, this component will contribute to ensuring
that children in China, particularly the most vulnerable, including children with disabilities,
have improved access to and complete child-friendly, quality and equity-oriented (suzhi
jiaoyu) education. Key elements include development and testing of a costed child-friendly
schools model in disadvantaged counties; piloting of social, emotional and mental health
education strategies in primary and secondary schools, especially for migration-affected and

5/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

ethnic minority children; demonstration of innovative teaching and learning and teacher
training models; promotion of gender-sensitive WASH facilities and practices in schools; and
development and testing of HIV- and AIDS-informed life skills curricula for adolescents in
and out of school.
20. This component will also contribute to ensuring that all children aged 0 to 6, particularly
the most disadvantaged, have improved access to affordable, quality early childhood care and
development, through actions to: support the Government in the development of strategies
for implementation of ECD quality standards and guidelines, including teacher training;
promote ECD models and strategies for children aged 3 to 6 ; pilot innovative, integrated
models of community-based ECD for the youngest children aged 0 to 3, and advocate for a
national focus on integrated approaches to ECD for this age group.
Child protection
21. Expanding on significant progress achieved in recent years, this component will
continue to support the development of an equitable and integrated child protection system
that benefits all children in China. Support will be provided for the development and
implementation of effective, gender-sensitive child protection and welfare related laws and
policies, in line with international standards; and strengthening the capacity of government
institutions at national and subnational level to provide equitable, quality and coordinated
child protection services, including in the justice system. A key element will be continued
support to the development of the workforce of social workers, including paraprofessionals.
Emphasis will be placed on increasing the availability and use of disaggregated child
protection data to inform planning, policy and programme development and budgeting.
22. This component will further contribute to ensuring that children benefit from a family
and community environment that protects them from violence, abuse, exploitation and
neglect, with particular attention to protecting girls and boys from violence and unnecessary
family separation; and strengthening the quality and coverage of community-based child
protection and welfare services with a focus on the most disadvantaged, including children
affected by HIV and AIDS and by migration, and children in humanitarian situations. The
programme will support the integration of these services into the child protection system.
Social policy and inclusion
23. Overarching the sectoral programmes, this component gives technical and policy focus
to initiatives to ensure that children, particularly the most disadvantaged and excluded,
benefit from equitable and inclusive poverty reduction and social protection systems. It will
support the generation of evidence on multiple dimensions of child poverty and social
exclusion, including gender inequality, HIV and AIDS and the impact of migration on
children. Evidence and knowledge will be developed for use in policy dialogue, advocacy
and local planning in all relevant sectors. They will strengthen government capacity to
legislate and implement inclusive poverty reduction and social protection interventions,
including cash transfer programmes.
24. The outcomes will contribute to the understanding of social sector budgets, providing
evidence that will be used to advocate for increased investment in services that benefit
children, and to promote effective, efficient and equitable finance for and governance of
essential public services across all sectors. They will also include strengthening institutional
capacity and governance for financing in favour of children. Innovation and South-South
learning will be promoted to support governance reforms and help to ensure that national

6/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

plans of action for women and children, essential public services, poverty reduction and
social protection measures reach all children with the intended impact and results.
Cross-sectoral
25. The cross-sectoral component will support activities related to programme management
and coordination, knowledge and advocacy, including coordination of multisectoral
initiatives. It will support evidence-based advocacy to promote and fulfil child rights through
public communication, strategic partnerships and coordination of knowledge generation
among a wide array of stakeholders. This includes the use of digital media and innovative
platforms and partnerships, as well as technical support for communication for development,
with a particular focus on adolescents and the prevention of HIV. Technical assistance will
be provided for local capacity strengthening and for studies, surveys, monitoring and
evaluation.
26. A coordinated approach will support action in multiple sectors across the country
programme, including a multi-hazard and child-centred approach to disaster risk reduction
(DRR), addressing climate change and environmental risks, and emergency response focused
on accelerating programme implementation. A major initiative with a focus on children aged
0 to 3 will be promoted for integrated early childhood development and will bring together
activities in all programme sectors.
Implementation strategies
27. Particularly in the context of the country’s size and immense resources, UNICEF and
other international partners are able to maximize their contributions to overall coverage and
benefits to children and vulnerable groups. This is achieved through support to testing new
and innovative approaches that contribute to positive policy changes, initiatives and budget
reforms which, when well implemented, benefit the most disadvantaged and vulnerable
children. Across all sectors, support will be provided to pilot and demonstration activities,
strengthening the capacity of service providers and communities, and increasing the capacity
of families and children to demand and access services. Focus will be given to activities in
selected counties with disadvantaged populations, and to support to adolescents and other
vulnerable groups. Barriers and bottlenecks will be identified and addressed in relation to (a)
knowledge and behaviours, social norms and other factors influencing the demand for and
access to services by families and communities; and (b) the equitable supply of quality
services, especially through innovative and integrated cross-sectoral models to reach the most
disadvantaged. The programme will actively work towards the elimination of gender
discrimination and inequality at all levels, through targeted interventions combined with
mainstreaming of gender-sensitive approaches.
28. Based on the evidence generated from pilot activities and related studies, surveys and
research, and drawing on international experience, the programme will promote strengthened
policies and build institutional capacity within the enabling environment. In the longer term,
it will help to shift social norms through policy dialogue, advocacy and follow-up to
implementation.
29. In recognition of the significant and growing potential of China to influence and assist
development in other countries through its voice in global and regional forums, UNICEF will
facilitate South-South cooperation, particularly with countries in Africa. This includes
providing China with technical support in its role as a supplier of low-cost, quality supplies
to other countries, both directly and through UNICEF supply channels.

7/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

30. The programme reflects the full range of UNICEF implementation strategies, with their
mix and emphasis varying according to the situation, needs and opportunities in relation to
different sectors and issues. Core strategies are capacity development; evidence generation,
policy dialogue and advocacy, and partnerships, with priorities on South-South cooperation,
innovation and support to integrated approaches.
31. UNICEF will continue to cooperate with the Government as its key partner. Its
partnerships with Government continue to primarily rest with line ministries and coordinating
bodies at the national level. UNICEF will cooperate with provincial- and county-level
governments for pilot and demonstration activities in all relevant sectors. In the area of HIV
and AIDS, for example, UNICEF will continue to cooperate closely with the State Council
AIDS Working Committee Office (SCAWCO), the HIV Section of the Disease Control
Bureau of the National Health and Family Planning Commission (CDC/NHFPC) and other
key partners at national and subnational levels.
32. UNICEF will increasingly explore cooperation with civil society, particularly to
accelerate shifts in social norms, family behaviour and demand for effective services.
Expansion of digital platforms, including through social media, will be instrumental in this
process. UNICEF also works with the private sector and corporate partnerships to promote
innovation and mobilize resources in support of the country’s commitment to children in
China and globally.
33. Partnerships with national and international academic and technical institutions, which
will work closely with the UNICEF team of technical experts, are critical for undertaking
research and analysis, and developing and validating evidence to inform policies and their
implementation for children. They are also essential for connecting China with the best global
expertise and thinking.
34. In accordance with the UNDAF modalities all programme components are linked to,
and contribute to the relevant thematic and working groups, and relevant Global Programme
Partnerships. UNICEF will coordinate closely with WHO and the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) on issues related to MCH, nutrition and sanitation. UNICEF coordinates with
the World Bank in these areas, with cooperation foreseen under the new Global Financing
Facility in support of Every Woman, Every Child. UNICEF will work with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) on issues related to
basic education and early childhood development. UNICEF will also work with UN-Women
(the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women) to ensure
effective coordination of gender-specific elements of the programme and application of
gender-sensitive approaches. HIV and AIDS issues will be coordinated together with the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UNFPA and WHO. UNICEF
and UNFPA jointly collaborate with the National Bureau of Statistics to strengthen national
statistical capacity and improve the quality and coverage of data on children and women.

8/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Health, nutrition and WASH

8 035

30 000

38 035

Education and child development

8 000

25 000

33 000

Child protection

7 500

20 000

27 500

Social policy and inclusion

7 500

12 000

19 500

Cross-sectoral

7 500

11 000

18 500

38 535

98 000

136 535

Total

Programme and risk management
35. The proposed programme builds on the strengths and achievements of more than 30
years of partnership and effective programmes of cooperation with the Government of China,
which have contributed to unparalleled progress for children in China. The programme
continues to be well aligned with the country’s national development priorities and with
national sectoral plans and programmes. UNICEF will continue to be an active member of
and play a leadership role in key United Nations thematic and working groups.
36. Management of the programme is results-based, in accordance with the corresponding
government emphasis and as stipulated in the UNDAF. This approach facilitates inter-agency
coordination through the mechanism of Results Groups for planning and programming,
including participatory planning between the Government and multilateral actors of the
United Nations system.
37. Strong partnership with the Government of China remains central to the programme
and its ongoing success. From the Government, the Ministry of Commerce, the National
Working Committee on Children and Women (NWCCW), the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC), various line ministries and organizations such as the AllChina Women’s Federation (ACWF) will be the key partners in planning and management
processes. This arrangement will ensure full alignment with national priorities and the
identification of challenges, as requested by Member States in the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations
system. Regular monitoring and review processes with these partners form the key
mechanism by which risks are identified and managed in the country programme. The
cooperation will continue to focus on developing and leveraging key areas of technical
expertise, and maximizing the use of strong government information and management
systems wherever possible.
38. UNICEF will continue to use the harmonized approach to cash transfers as the
mechanism for management of programme financial resources, through the reimbursement
modality. UNICEF workplans will be further integrated with the workplans of government
partners to ensure financial sustainability. National audit systems will be engaged to support
programme and financial assurance activities. Efforts will continue to be made to strengthen
accountabilities, particularly at subnational level.

9/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

39. As the country’s national resources continue to grow, UNICEF will use its available
regular resources to fund core programme and essential inputs for priority strategies and
interventions. The wider implementation of the country programme will be supported by
other resources, which will be developed through three major channels: (a) partnerships with
the UNICEF National Committees and, through them, with corporations that wish to develop
their corporate social responsibility (CSR) profile in China; (b) engagement with global
alliances and international foundations, and (c) expanding CSR partnerships in China, and
the continuing promotion of cards and gifts. Building on the strong performance achieved to
date, it is expected that the programme’s funding needs can be fully met.
40. Monitoring systems will be maintained and strengthened for routine measurement of
progress and results, in line with the indicators and targets contained in programme
workplans. Close and regular communications with programme partners at national and
subnational levels will continue to be critical as early warning mechanisms of implementation
issues. Periodic review processes are in place with all partners to identify actions that may
need to be taken to ensure programme quality, efficiency and effectiveness. These are
supplemented by regular internal management monitoring and review processes.
41. Modest adjustments are being made to the programme management structure to ensure
maximum alignment with its goals and resources. The new programme introduces a range of
areas that require strengthened staff technical capacities, reflecting a risk to the achievement
of planned results. To mitigate this risk, a comprehensive staff learning and development
programme is being implemented. There are no changes to the location or operational
procedures of the UNICEF country office.
42. This country programme document outlines UNICEF contributions to national results
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operational policies and procedures.

Monitoring and evaluation
43. A robust data and monitoring system to track progress, assess performance and support
adaptation in different contexts is a key component of the UNICEF pilot project strategy to
inform policymaking and guide the implementation of policies to benefit the most
disadvantaged. Bottleneck and barrier analysis will be applied strategically to gain
knowledge of constraints and how they are being addressed. In the framework of the
Monitoring Results for Equity System, UNICEF will continue to collaborate with national
statistical systems to improve the coverage and quality of disaggregated data and strengthen
results monitoring. Within the health programme, a major element is the establishment of an
integrated health management information system.
44. Systematic monitoring and analysis of the situation and rights of children and equity
gaps is an essential, integrated element of the country programme. UNICEF will further
strengthen its continuous analysis of the situation of children and women, with a focus on
generating new knowledge, analysing and packaging information and communicating
evidence for advocacy. The processes of knowledge generation and management are being
addressed in an increasingly integrated manner, with the aim of strengthening national and
subnational capacities and systems.

10/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

45. UNICEF will coordinate and work jointly with other agencies to monitor the
implementation and results of the UNDAF, including the UNICEF contribution.
46. Information on emergency risks in relation to natural disasters is generated at county,
provincial and national level through existing government channels. UNICEF and other
partners are cooperating with the Government to further improve the timeliness and quality
of disaster-related information and its analysis with a child focus.
47. The Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan and annual planning will identify the
mechanisms and instruments of the research, studies and evaluations to be carried out each
year. From 2016 to 2020 at least three major evaluations will be conducted: (a) Evaluation
pilot implementation of child friendly spaces; (b) Evaluation of the integrated maternal and
child health project, and (c) Final evaluation of the integrated maternal and child health
conditional cash transfers pilot. A range of other evaluations and assessments will be
undertaken during the programme cycle to inform decision-making on scale up, programme
design and policy adjustments, with an emphasis on strengthening national evaluation
capacity.
48. In close collaboration with the Ministry of Commerce and coordinating partners,
regular reviews of the programme will be carried out in order to identify progress, constraints
and lessons learned, and to introduce any necessary adjustments.

11/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

Annex
Results and resources framework
China - UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016–2020
All UNICEF programme outcomes contribute to the three proposed UNDAF outcomes, in particular to Outcome 1: “More people, particularly the
vulnerable and disadvantaged, enjoy improved living conditions and increased opportunities for economic, social and cultural development.”
UNDAF Outcome indicators, including those measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution, are to be finalized by end-2015.
UNICEF outcomes

Key progress
indicators,
baselines and
targets

Means of
verification

Indicative country programme outputs

Major partners
and
partnership
frameworks

Indicative resources
by outcome
(in millions of US
dollars)
RR

OR

Total

6.0

3.4

9.4

1. Health, Nutrition and WASH
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan Outcome(s): 1. Health, 2. HIV/AIDS, 3. WASH, 4. Nutrition
1.1 National policies
for child survival and
development (CSD)/
quality of services.
By 2020, pregnant
women and children,
particularly the most
disadvantaged,
increasingly benefit
from equitable
national policies,
guidelines and tools
for, and innovative
monitoring and
evaluation of, high
impact and quality
interventions for

Number of national
policies and
guidelines
developed
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD

Government
documents

Number of
provincial child
survival strategies
developed and
incorporated into
plans
(4/TBD)

Government
documents

1.1.1 MCH. Increased evidence and
policymakers’ capacity to formulate and
revise policies, guidelines and tools for high
impact interventions for MCH, PPTCT of
HIV and child and adolescent development,
and support equitable delivery of quality
services.
1.1.2 WASH (sanitation and hygiene).
Increased evidence and policymakers’
capacity to formulate and revise policies,
guidelines and tools for pro-poor sanitation,
promote public-private partnerships and
support equitable delivery of quality
sanitation services.

NWCCW
NDRC
NHFPC
National
Patriotic Health
Campaign
Committee
Office
(NPHCCO)
SCAWCO
WHO, UNFPA
World Bank

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

survival and
development (MCH,
nutrition, WASH,
immunization and
child injury
prevention).
1.2 Coverage and
quality of services,
demand and access.
By 2020, pregnant
women, children and
their caretakers,
particularly the most
disadvantaged in
UNICEF
demonstration
counties, have
increased demand for
and access to high
impact and quality
interventions for
survival and
development.

Percent of newborns
registered within 3
days
(TBD/TBD)

Surveys,
routine
monitoring

Percent of pregnant
women and children
with minimal
acceptable diet
(TBD/TBD)

Surveys,
routine
monitoring

1.2.1 Health providers’ capacity. Increased
skills and capacity of health providers at
national and subnational level to deliver
evidence-based, standardized, high impact
interventions for maternal and child
survival, nutrition, immunization, PMTCT
of HIV, hygiene and sanitation and
adolescent health, and to mobilize local
leaders and heads of facilities.

NWCCW
NDRC
NHFPC
NPHCCO
ACWF

2.0

26.6

28.6

8.0

30.0

38.0

5.0

16.0

21.0

1.2.2 Community capacity and family
behaviour and demand. Increased
mobilization and engagement of households
and community leaders for maternal, child
and adolescent health promotion,
immunization, injury prevention and
sanitation and hygiene, and improved skills
and capacity at household level.

Total resources

2. Education and Child Development
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan Outcome(s): 5. Education
2.1 Child-friendly
quality education. By
2020, children in
China aged 6 to 18
years, particularly the
most vulnerable, have

Number of schools
implementing
national (Ministry
of Education, MOE)
child friendly
standards

M&E reports

2.1.1 Child friendly schools pilot model. A
comprehensive model of child-friendly
schools developed, tested and costed in
disadvantaged counties.

Ministry of
Education
UNESCO

13/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

improved equitable
access to and
complete childfriendly learning and
suzhi jiaoyu-oriented
education.

(0/250)
Number of counties
adopting life skills
education package
(0/20)

M&E reports

2.2 ECD. By 2020,
children aged 0-6
years, particularly the
most disadvantaged,
have improved access
to affordable quality
early childhood care
and development.

National
kindergarten
enrolment rate
(67.5%/85%)

Education
Management
Information
System

Number of ECD
teachers in
disadvantaged
counties trained per
year
(0/4,000)

M&E reports

2.1.2 Social and emotional learning.
Comprehensive model of social and
emotional learning and mental health
developed and tested to support
implementation of national standards and
guidelines.

China
Association for
Science and
Technology
(CAST)

2.2.1 ECD (3-6 years). Models and
strategies developed and piloted to promote
quality ECD for 3-6-year-olds, with a focus
on disadvantaged groups.

Ministry of
Education
ACWF
NWCCW
China National
Committee for
the Care of
Children
(CNCCC)
World Bank

2.2.2 ECD (0-3 years). Models of
community-based integrated ECD for
disadvantaged children aged 0-3 years
piloted and assessed to inform scale up at
national level.

National Centre
for Educational
Technology
(NCET)

Total resources

3.0

9.0

12.0

8.0

25.0

33.0

5.0

11.0

16.0

3. Child Protection
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan Outcome(s): 6: Child Protection
3.1 Child protection
system. By 2020,
girls and boys in
China, especially the
most disadvantaged,
increasingly benefit
from an equitable and
integrated child

14/18

Number of laws and
policies on child
protection and
welfare in line with
international
standards adopted or
updated
(0/5)

National
records

3.1.1 Child protection related laws and
policies. Enhanced capacity of national and
subnational government counterparts to draft,
review and revise gender-sensitive child
protection and welfare related laws and
policies in line with international standards.

National
People’s
Congress
Ministry of
Civil Affairs
(MCA)

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

protection system,
including in
humanitarian
situations

Number of national
protocols for
prevention and
response services
for child protection
developed and
adopted
(4/8)

National
protocols

3.1.2 Child protection and welfare services.
Enhanced capacity of government
institutions at national and subnational level
to provide equitable, quality and coordinated
child protection and welfare services,
including child-friendly justice, to girls and
boys and their families.

Ministry of
Public Security
Ministry of
Justice
CDC/NHFPC
NWCCW,
ACWF,
CNCCC
China Disabled
Persons’
Federation
(CDPF)
SCAWCO

3.2 Protective
environment for
children. By 2020,
girls and boys in
China, especially the
most disadvantaged,
increasingly benefit
from a supportive
community
environment that
protects children
from violence, abuse,
exploitation and
neglect and promotes
their welfare.

Proportion of target
population in
selected sites who
understand and
demonstrate nonviolent behaviour
towards children
(TBD/TBD)

Surveys,
monitoring
reports

3.2.1 Behaviour change. Increased
awareness, capacities and commitment of
families, communities and Government in
selected areas to address violence against
girls and boys and unnecessary family
separation, including in humanitarian
situations.

NWCCW
ACWF
MCA
CDC/NHFPC
CDPF

Proportion of
disadvantaged
children in
programme areas
benefiting from
protection and
welfare services
(TBD/TBD)

Monitoring
reports

Total resources

2.5

9.0

11.5

7.5

20.0

27.5

3.2.2 Community-based services. Increased
coverage and quality of equitable
community-based child protection and
welfare services particularly for the most
disadvantaged, including those affected by
HIV and AIDS and migration.

4. Social Policy and Inclusion

15/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

Related UNICEF Strategic Plan Outcome(s): 7. Social Inclusion
4.1 Poverty reduction
and social protection.
By 2020, girls and
boys, particularly the
most disadvantaged
and excluded, benefit
from more equitable
and inclusive poverty
reduction and social
protection systems,
policies and
programmes.

Number of
subnational
government poverty
reduction plans
containing
commitment and
measures to reduce
child poverty.
(1/3)

County poverty
plans

Coverage rate of
girls and boys,
particularly the most
disadvantaged,
benefiting from
expanded dibao
(cash transfer
system)
(13%/20%)

Administrative
records,
statistical
reports

4.2 Essential social
services. By 2020,
girls and boys,
particularly the most
disadvantaged and
excluded, have
increased access and
utilization of
effective, efficient
and equitable
essential social
services.

National and
subnational
government
expenditure on
essential social
services as a share
of gross domestic
product
(8.3%/10%)

Administrative
records,
statistical
reports

16/18

Out-of-pocket
expenditure as share
of total health
expenditure
(33%/<30%)

4.1.1 Child poverty analysis. Strengthened
capacity of Government partners to
recognize and measure child poverty and
disparities, and generate and use evidence to
design, implement, monitor and resource
child poverty plans.
4.1.2 Social protection policies.
Strengthened engagement and enhanced
capacity of Government partners to
legislate, reform and implement inclusive
social protection interventions that uphold
the rights of girls and boys.

4.2.1 Analysis for new and expanded
policies. Strengthened capacity of
government partners to conduct evidencebased policy analysis on child-focused
essential social services, to ensure financing
of new and expanded policies.
4.2.2 Technical support to existing policies.
Increased capacity of government partners
to apply child focused and gender-sensitive
economic analysis and effective governance
practices to design, scale up, sustain and
evaluate existing policies for social services.

International
Poverty
Reduction
Centre in China
Leading Group
Office on
Poverty
Alleviation and
Development
MCA
Ministry of
Commerce
NWCCW,
ACWF

3.7

8.5

12.2

Ministry of
Finance
NDRC
NWCCW
World Bank
Asian
Development
Bank

3.8

3.5

7.3

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

Total resources

7.5

12.0

19.5

CCTV
Xinhua News
Agency
ACWF,
CNCCC
National
Bureau of
Statistics
National
Disaster
Reduction
Center of China
MCA
China Center
for Health
Education
Chinese
Academy of
Social Sciences

7.5

11.0

18.5

(Reference the
respective
programmes)

0.0

0.0

0.0

5. Cross-Cutting
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan Outcome(s): 7. Social Inclusion/all other Strategic Plan outcomes
5.1 Knowledge,
evidence and
advocacy. By 2020,
country and
government leaders,
policymakers and
decision makers and
other key
stakeholders across
society utilize robust
knowledge and
evidence to inform
the development of
equitable policies,
programmes, public
communication and
advocacy to improve
the situation of the
most disadvantaged
and vulnerable
children and women.

Number of
influential advocacy
initiatives produced
with engagement of
young people,
academia and the
private sector
(TBD/TBD)

5.2 Integrated
approaches to ECD.
By 2020, children in
China, particularly
the most
disadvantaged,
benefit from
multisectoral,
integrated models to
support early

TBD

UNICEF and
partner
information
systems

5.1.1 Public communication and advocacy.
Key decision makers, informants, opinion
leaders and the general public are better
informed, more aware of and committed to
promoting positive social norms and action
in the best interests of the child.
5.1.2 Emergency preparedness/DRR and
response. Improved knowledge and capacity
of public authorities, service providers and
communities in identified disaster-prone
areas to respond to emergencies, increase
preparedness, reduce disaster risks,
strengthen resilience and mitigate climate
change impacts.

Number of DRR
and preparedness
plans established
and practiced in
pilot areas
(TBD/TBD)

TBD

(‘Virtual’ outcome, reflecting relevant
outputs from different programmes.)

17/18

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.22

childhood
development.
Total resources

7.5

11.0

18.5

Grand total

38.5

98.0

136.5

_______

18/18

