Colombia
Country programme document
2008-2012

The draft country programme document for Colombia
(E/ICEF/2007/P/L.44) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2007 second regular session (5-7
September 2007).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2008 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 1 February 2008.

†

Basic data
(Corresponding to 2005, unless otherwise stated)

Population under the age of 18 (millions)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight ( per cent, mod & severe, 2003)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2002)
Primary school attendance ( per cent, net male/female, 2004-05)
Primary school children reaching grade 5 ( per cent, 2004-05)

16.8
21
7
84
90/92
89

Use of improved drinking water sources ( per cent, 2004)

93*

Adult HIV prevalence rate ( per cent)

0.6

Child labour ( per cent children 5-14 years old, 2004-2005)

5

GNI per capita (US$)

2 290

One year olds immunized with DPT3 ( per cent)

87**

One year olds immunized with measles vaccine (MMR)

89**

† More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
* Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2005: Improved drinking water sou rces gives 88 per
cent.
** DHS 2005: DPT3 is 81 per cent and measles is 82 per cent.

Situation of children and women
1.
Colombian children comprise 38 per cent, and adolescents 16 per cent, of the
estimated population of more than 40 million. 1 Although the population is
characteristically mestizo, some 10 per cent defines itself as Afro -descendant and
3.3 per cent as indigenous. Of the 1.4 million indigenous persons belonging to 80
ethnicities, 40 per cent are under age 15. While Colombia is known f or having a
stable democracy, violence due to illegal armed groups has left innumerable victims,
among them more than 1.9 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), of whom 57
per cent are children.
2.
The economy has been on a recovery trend during the past three years. The
gross domestic product grew by 6.8 per cent during 2006 as a result of favourable
external factors, efforts to reduce public debt and export growth.
3.
The Common Country Assessment (CCA), the 2006 recommendations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and other recent analyses of the situation of
child rights have shown that, although significant progress has been made in child
rights indicators, vast disparities exist and numerous population groups (IDP,
indigenous, Afro-Colombian and residents of some geographic areas) have been
excluded from these advances. The Government’s Millennium Development Goals
report indicates that Colombia is on track for targets of reducing extreme poverty,
achieving universal access to primary education, promoting gender equality in
primary education and achieving sustainable development. Achieving these Goals,
however, will require accelerated efforts focused on the most vulnerable

__________________
1

2

All figures are from official Government sources.

populations. Significant challenges also need to be addressed in HI V/AIDS
prevention, reduction of child mortality, poverty reduction and maternal health.
4.
Despite a reduction in poverty (from 56 per cent in 2002 to 45 per cent in
2006), poverty continues to be widespread and particularly prevalent among IDPs
(93 per cent); indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups, children under nine (nearly
65 per cent) and rural populations (rural:urban poverty is 3:1). Income distribution
shows high inequality, and the Gini coefficient, 0.54, is sharply higher than the 0.45
in 1996.
5.
During the last five years, mortality and main health indicators have
moderately improved: the under-five mortality rate (U5MR) dropped from 33 per
1,000 live births in 1995 to 21 per 1,000 in 2005, but sharp urban/rural disparities
persist (30 rural, 19 urban).
6.
The maternal mortality ratio (MMR) dropped from 104 to 79 per 100,000 live
births between 2000 and 2004. However in the departments of Chocó, Guaviare,
Guanía, Caquetá, Putumayo and Vaupés, the ratio is double the national average.
The increase in adolescent pregnancy requires policy action: an estimated 21 per
cent of women 15-19 are either pregnant or have had a child (among IDPs, 35 per
cent).
7.
In 2005, 6 per cent of newborns were underweight. Due to lack of proper
integrated health care, feeding and hygiene conditions, 12 per cent of children under
age five suffered from stunting (among IDPs, 23 per cent). Some 16 per cent of
adolescents manifest delay in growth ,and 7 per cent are underweight. The
nutritional status of rural, indigenous and displaced children — particularly girls —
is well below the national average.
8.
Between 1992 and 2005, net pre-school enrolment rose from 6.3 per cent to
11.6 per cent; net primary school enrolment increased 26.9 per cent; and net
secondary enrolment increased 26.2 per cent. Gains have also been made in
reducing dropout rates (rural: 11.6 per cent in 1995 to 7.62 per cent in 2004; urban
6.4 per cent to 5.3 per cent). The repetition rate decreased by 1.87 per cent between
1996 and 2006. However, regional disparities exist. The Government has made
advances towards a policy on early education and has had promising discussions on
eliminating all costs of primary education. However, the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women highlighted in 2006 the lack of
education policies to address stereotypes, which are needed to address gender
discrimination.
9.
HIV prevalence grew from 0.02 per cent in 1988 to 0.7 per cent in 2004, with
over 55,000 reported cases between 1983 and 2005. Prevalence amon g pregnant
women was estimated at 0.65 per cent in 2005, and the mother-to-child transmission
is 2 per cent. Infection among youth 15-24 years old has increased steadily: from 62
cases in 1989 to 706 in 2005. Between 1990 and 2005, in children under 15 yea rs
old, 1,343 cases of infection were reported, and 4,000 children were estimated to be
living with HIV/AIDS. Reliable data on children orphaned by HIV/AIDS does not
exist. The policy response includes the implementation of a National Response Plan
for HIV/AIDS (2007-2010).
10. The gap between the men’s and women’s Human Development Index has
decreased steadily in recent years. The Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women highlighted the Government’s efforts in promoting

3

policy and institutional reform in favour of women’s rights but noted the persistence
of pronounced gender inequalities. Women continue to be strongly affected by
violence (including sexual) caused by illegal armed groups and by domestic
violence. It is estimated that 39 per cent of all women who are or have been married
or in union have been victims of some form of physical abuse by their husband or
partner.
11. Violence caused by illegal armed groups continues to affect children and
adolescents, who are often victims of displacement or confinement, accidents
caused by landmines and unexploded ordnance (UXO) and recruitment by illegal
armed groups. Events involving mines and UXO increased between 1990 and 2006
and registered the highest number of new victims worldwide in 2 005. Between 1990
and 2006, 3,108 accidents were reported, involving 6,003 victims, 582 of them
under age 18.
12. While the National Army has complied with the Law 548 of 1999 prohibiting
forced and voluntary recruitment of children, enrolment by illegal a rmed groups
persists, though the number of cases is impossible to estimate. Poverty, low quality
of education in rural zones, lack of opportunities, domestic violence, exploitation,
abuse and an idealistic perception of armed groups and weapons are among t he risk
factors. In 2006, the Committee on the Rights of the Child strongly emphasized the
need to end children’s participation in illegal armed groups. Meanwhile, from 1999
to 31 May 2007, 3,237 demobilized children and adolescents received specialized
attention by the Colombian Family Welfare Institute (Instituto Colombiano de
Bienestar Familiar, ICBF).
13. Colombia is being considered for inclusion in the agenda of the Working
Group of United Nations Security Council. The Working Group was created in
Security Council Resolution 1612, which gives a mandate to monitor child rights
violations in all countries where children and adolescents are affected by violence
generated by armed groups.
14. The Committee also highlighted domestic violence, child abuse, s exual abuse
and exploitation affecting children and adolescents. Between 2002 and 2005, 5,674
children under 18 were murdered. In 2005, 12,525 cases of domestic violence and
13,835 cases of sexual abuse involving children were reported. Girls aged 10 -14 are
the most common victims of sexual abuse. Child labour encompasses 8.9 per cent of
children and adolescents aged 5-17, reaching 22.9 per cent among adolescents
15-17.
15. The Child and Adolescent Code, which entered into force in May 2007,
provides concrete possibilities for building on the well-established framework of
laws and regulations guaranteeing the rights of children and adolescents. However,
strengthened capacity at subnational levels is needed to ensure the protection of
child rights. It is particularly important to strengthen the recently implemented
juvenile justice system and to build on efforts to guarantee the care and protection
of all demobilized children.
16. The national Government, through the Ministry of National Education and the
ICBF, has designed a strategy for children under five that encompasses integrated
attention in care, nutrition and primary education. Currently 801,944 children
receive care in community homes, and 139,449 in infant care homes.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2002-2007
Main results achieved
17. UNICEF technical assistance and advocacy contributed to the development
and adoption of the Child and Adolescent Code, which includes substantial reforms
in juvenile justice and child labour, and specifies local government responsibility for
promoting and protecting child rights.
18. The 2005 mid-term review (MTR) of the country programme highlighted
achievements in replicating and mainstreaming successful Government initiatives
supported by UNICEF into public policy. Partnership with the Attorney General’s
Office and the ICBF helped to translate the Facts and Rights Strategy into national
policy and to consolidate political support among the country’s 32 governors for
implementing child rights. Actions, goals and resources for children were
incorporated into departmental development plans, and local management capacity
was strengthened. As a result, the number of departments implementing programmes
to prevent and address children’s issues, such as sexual exploitation and recruitment
by illegal armed groups, has more than doubled in the last three years. The School
Going to the Child Initiative, which focuses on getting excluded children into
school, has been adopted as public policy by one department (Quindio), and is being
considered for adoption by others. The Solid Waste Management Programme, which
started as a pilot in six municipalities showing substantial morbidity and infant
mortality, was developed into national public environmental policy headed by the
Ministry of Environment, Housing and Territorial Development. This programme
has improved the quality of life of 3 million children and their families, and
includes a component for strengthening adolescents’ knowledge, attitudes an d
practices regarding the environment and citizenship.
19. In partnership with various state and civil society organizations, UNICEF
waged a communication campaign to prevent the recruitment of children by illegal
armed groups, reaching more than 15 million Colombians, including children in
high-risk zones. Technical support has been provided to different participatory,
sports, educational and vocational strategies aimed at preventing such recruitment in
40 municipalities where it is prevalent. UNICEF also provided technical leadership
for the design of a public policy to prevent recruitment.
20. In alliance with various civil and State organizations, UNICEF supported the
development of public policies on early childhood as a response to a social
mobilization process.
Lessons learned
21. The 2005 MTR concluded that the rights approach has helped to strengthen the
programmes of UNICEF and its partners, making them more comprehensive and
sustainable. The lack of disaggregated data, however, has prevented effective
mainstreaming of gender issues.
22. UNICEF has strengthened its support of and participation in social networks,
with a more open and horizontal cooperation with partners and counterparts. Close
cooperation with the State bodies (offices of the Attorney General, Ombudsman and
Comptroller) has yielded positive results, given these offices’ strong political

5

influence and role in preventive surveillance and the monitoring of public policy
results.
23. The MTR and annual evaluations also indicated the importance of
strengthening and expanding social responsibility in the private sector. This
recommendation responds to the capacity of UNICEF to advocate for private sector
engagement in the design and implementation of social policies and programmes,
especially in priority areas that will have a positive impact on children’s rights.
24. Several pilot projects supported by UNICEF were effective in influencing the
development of appropriate policy. The MTR and other evaluations identified key
factors leading to success: (a) close collaboration with the national and/or local
governments; (b) advocacy based on solid evidence; (c) careful monitoring of
project implementation; (d) active citizen participation and community ownership;
and (e) documentation of results achieved and lessons learned.
25. Nonetheless, UNICEF still needs to strengthen monitoring and evaluation by
increasing support to (a) partners and counterparts in producing and analysing
disaggregated data and other information on the situation of c hildren; (b) local
governments in the creation local-level monitoring systems; and (c) the
strengthening of national capacities to translate public policies into budget
allocations and expenditure in favour of children’s rights.
26. The MTR and the 2006 year-end review concluded that UNICEF should strive
for greater coordination among different programmatic areas, and particularly
between humanitarian action and public policy work.
27. The MTR and other evaluations showed the need for increased/decentraliz ed
UNICEF field presence in order to: (a) strengthen programme implementation and
monitor effective adherence to UNICEF programming principles; (b) provide a
faster and more effective response to emergencies; (c) increase access to rural
communities that are strongly affected by violence; and (d) harmonize work with
other United Nations agencies in the field.

The country programme, 2008-2012
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Child survival and development
Quality education, adolescent development and
prevention of HIV/AIDS
Protection and humanitarian action
Evidence-based public policies
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Regular resources

Other resources*

Total

1 100

5 000

6 100

950

5 000

5 950

—

15 200

15 200

900

3 700

4 600

1 500

1 100

2 600

4 450

30 000

34 450

* In addition, emergency other resources will be sought under the Humanitarian Action Plan.

6

Programme preparation process
28. Following the 2005 MTR, the 2008-2012 country programme was designed
simultaneously with the preparation of the CCA and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), in which UNICEF participated
actively and provided leadership. Subsequently, several consultations took place
with partners, counterparts, beneficiaries and donors to plan the new programme.
Goals, key results and strategies
29. The proposed country programme will contribute to the ability of Colombian
children and adolescents to live in a country where the State and society guarantee
the full realization of their rights, social inclusion and non -violence within the
framework of national legislation and human rights instruments and international
law (Convention on the Rights of the Child and Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women). The programme will have a strong
focus on the most disadvantaged geographic zones and vulnerable population groups
(those who are internally displaced, affected by violence, in rural and/or poor areas,
Afro-Colombian, and indigenous) and will prioritize 11 departments with key social
development and child rights indicators significantly below national averages and
where violence and its consequences have had a significant impact on children and
their families. 2 At the national level, efforts will focus on thematic areas such as the
Facts and Rights Strategy and implementation of the Child and Adolescent Code,
benefiting all departments. UNICEF cooperation will seek to influence public
policies, legislation and public spending through an evidence-based approach
involving technical support; generation of key information and knowledge
stemming from monitoring and evaluation activities; programme communication;
and social mobilization strategies. Special emphasis will be placed on generating,
collecting and analysing disaggregated information in order to better address gender,
social and ethnic disparities and strengthen gender mainstreaming and disparity
reduction.
30. The new programme will support legislation, policies and natio nal
development plans (such as the 2007-2012 Plan for Childhood and Adolescence),
pilot projects, and comprehensive community-based interventions, placing special
emphasis on strengthening the capacity of rights holders to claim their rights, and
the capacity of duty bearers to meet their obligations towards children. It will also
promote the right to participation throughout the life cycle, strengthening the
capacity of children and adolescents to contribute to their own well -being in the
school, family and community environment, as well as strengthening their role in
the design and implementation of policies, programmes and plans.
31. The programme builds on efforts in the previous cycle to strengthen local
government capacity to promote and protect child rights at the municipal level,
within the framework of the Facts and Rights Strategy. Several successful pilot
projects, e.g., The School Going to the Child, will be mainstreamed and taken to
national scale under this strategy. Based on lessons learned from previous
__________________
2

These departments are: Amazonas, Antioquia, Bolívar, Boyacá, Córdoba, Cauca, Chocó,
Guajira, Huila, Magdalena and Nariño. Criteria used for focalization: poverty line, maternal
mortality, infant mortality and education net coverage. This prioritization does not exclude the
possibility of expanding UNICEF cooperation to other Colombian departments throughout the
next programme cycle if deemed necessary.

7

cooperation, the new programme will focus on strengthening the links and synergies
between local-level projects and upstream public policy work at national,
departmental and municipal levels, through mutually reinforcing communication,
mobilization and evidence-based advocacy strategies, including a new focus on
promoting social responsibility within the private sector. Cross -cutting strategies for
participation, non-violence and social and gender equality will address key issues
identified in the situation analysis and the MTR. Cognizant of the risks of natural
disasters, UNICEF will join efforts with other United Nations agencies and national
counterparts to develop local capacities in emergency preparedness and response in
coordination with the national Government.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
32. The country programme coheres with the social goals of the 2006 -2010
National Development Plan, particularly the sectoral goals for education and health.
Under the Facts and Rights Strategy, UNICEF action will be fully integrated with
governmental initiatives, including in the areas of protection and humanitarian
action. UNICEF will play a major role in achieving UNDAF results, especially in
the areas of mother/child survival and health, reproductive health and HIV/AIDS,
nutrition, healthy environment, child development, primary education, protection,
governance and local development, humanitarian action and the promotion of peace.
Relationship to international priorities
33. The country programme is fully aligned with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the Millennium Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals, and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Humanitarian action to
protect children from the consequences of violence generated by illegal armed
groups and humanitarian situations will also be guided by the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its optional protocols, the UNICEF Core Commitments for
Children in Emergencies (CCC), the Geneva Conventions on International
Humanitarian Law and their protocols, the Ottawa Treaty on Landmines, the Statute
of the International Criminal Court and the United Nations General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions on the use of children as soldi ers.
Programme components
34. The 2008-2012 country programme, developed using a rights approach and
results-based management framework, has four components: child survival and
development; quality education, adolescent development and prevention of
HIV/AIDS; protection and humanitarian action; and evidence -based public policies.
Partners will include the Government, non-governmental organizations, civil
society, the private sector, and community (including indigenous and Afro Colombian), women’s, youth, media and academic organizations, as well as United
Nations agencies. All partners are listed in the results matrix.
35. Component 1: child survival and development will contribute to reducing
maternal and infant mortality from preventable causes, including HIV/AIDS, and
will foster early childhood development (ECD) and improvement in the nutritional
situation of very young children — including attention given to anaemia and water
and basic sanitation conditions — emphasizing internally displaced and other

8

vulnerable populations. It includes three subcomponents: health and nutrition; water,
sanitation and hygiene, and ECD.
36. In health and nutrition, UNICEF will provide training and technical
assistance to seven departments to implement the Women- and Child-Friendly
Hospitals Initiative in at least 50 hospitals, aiming to provide quality, gender and
ethnic-sensitive care in health and nutrition to 274,000 women of childbearing age
(including pregnant and breast-feeding women) and 210,000 children under five.
Technical assistance will be provided to Social Security System actors (health
secretariats, public health insurance companies, hospital directors, among others), as
well as to four departments, for preparing Food Security and Nutritional Plans in the
framework of national policies, in partnership with Plan International, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization/Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO). UNICEF will also participate in efforts to reduce anaemia
and other micronutrient deficiencies.
37. In water, sanitation and hygiene, UNICEF will support national programmes,
including “Home and well-being” to expand equitable and sustainable access to safe
drinking water, sanitation, solid waste management and hygiene improvement in
rural areas, including indigenous territories. Support will cover 14 departments, 3 4.4
million children and 3.3 million women, providing technical assistance, and
influencing policy, training, social mobilization and research. Counterparts include
the Ministry of the Environment, the ICBF and sectoral institutions, regional and
local institutions, the International Organization for Migration, PAHO, the United
States Agency for International Development and the World Bank. Access to safe
drinking water, sanitation and solid waste collection coverage in rural areas is
expected to be increased by 10 per cent.
38. UNICEF will provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Education, the
ICBF, and departmental and municipal entities to formulate and implement a
national and local public policy guaranteeing early childhood education to 400,000
children under five during 2007-2010. 4 In addition, UNICEF will support integrated
care and development for children under five by assisting local initiatives that
promote family and community participation and use an ethnically and culturally
sensitive approach.
39. Component 2: quality education, adolescent development and prevention
of HIV/AIDS includes the three subcomponents named above. UNICEF will
provide technical assistance to increase the content and quality of education to
ensure that girls, boys and adolescents from vulnerable populations in the priority
departments acquire skills for life, including HIV/AIDS prevention, citizenship
skills, vocational training and increased respect for and exercise of human rights.
40. The quality education subcomponent focuses on technical assistance and
advocacy for access by vulnerable children to quality and inclusive primary and
secondary education, aiming to create opportunities that promote a culture of peace
and respect for diversity. These efforts will contribute to the achievement of basic
education and social and citizenship skills which will, in turn, help children to plan
and implement life goals and to develop to their full potential. This subcomponent
__________________
3
4

Poorest populations, internally displaced, indigenous and Afro-Colombians.
This figure corresponds to the goal set by the Colombian Government in its National
Development Plan.

9

seeks to increase coverage and reduce repetition and dropout rates in primary and
secondary education, scaling up successful initiatives that promote gender equality.
Expected results in 11 priority departments include: (a) 100 per cent children
complete primary and secondary education until 9 th grade and at least 40 per cent of
adolescents in eleven priority departments complete secondary education (until
grade 11) that meets quality, pertinence, relevance and equality criteri a; (b) In 11
priority departments, there is an increase in access of vulnerable children and
adolescents to flexible learning opportunities, including in emergency situations .
41. In coordination with national policies and partners, the adolescent
development subcomponent will focus on supporting and influencing adolescent
public policies at all levels and articulating public investment. Adolescents (age
10-17) will be recognized (by themselves, families, schools, communities and the
country as a whole) as agents promoting socioeconomic development and social
cohesion in the country. The following results are expected: (a) 50per cent
adolescents in 11 priority departments have and apply knowledge on citizenship,
peace, sexual and reproductive health including HIV/AIDS.; (b) 30 per cent of
adolescents access sexual and reproductive health services and programmes for the
prevention of pregnancy, addictions and violent behaviour; (c) Legislation and
public policies for adolescents and youth in 11 priority depart ments are designed
and implemented in a coordinated, appropriate and effective manner with the active
participation of adolescents.
42.
The prevention of HIV/AIDS subcomponent will support coordinated
actions in education, health, protection and participation to promote sexual and
reproductive health and reduce HIV/AIDS infection and adolescent pregnancy.
Gender and racial/ethnic inequality will be addressed, since this contributes to the
spread of the pandemic. UNICEF will also provide technical support to the
implementation of the National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan (2007 -2011) through the
United Nations Theme Group on HIV/AIDS. In specific departments with high
HIV/AIDS prevalence, including those strongly affected by violence, UNICEF will
support education and health programmes offering age-appropriate, and gender and
culturally-sensitive sexual and reproductive health information, skills and services
to reduce young people’s risks and vulnerability to HIV and adolescent pregnancy.
The participation of adolescents and the expansion of adolescent-friendly voluntary
counselling and confidential testing services will be emphasized, as well as targeted
interventions providing information and education to promote healthy habits and
skills for life. Expected results in 11 priority departments include: (a) at least 70 per
cent of pregnant women are taking an HIV test; and (b) the main health -service
delivery institutions in 50 per cent of all departments will provide sexual and
reproductive health services that are accessible and affordable and have personnel
trained in the provision of services to adolescents.
43. Component 3: protection and humanitarian action. Within the framework
of the humanitarian Inter-Agency Standing Committee, UNICEF will provide
technical assistance to national and local institutions responsible for ensuring a
gender-sensitive protective environment for children and adolescents affected by
violence. The four subcomponents will focus on: (a) preventing the recruitment of
children into illegal armed groups; (b) landmine risk education and care for victims;
(c) protection of displaced and confined child populations; and (d) protection of
children from violence, exploitation and abuse.

10

44. The prevention of recruitment subcomponent will promote the adoption of
national public policies to prevent the recruitment of children and adolescents into
illegal armed groups, and the strengthening of the National System for Family
Welfare, responsible for providing assistance to support the reintegration of
demobilized children and adolescents.
45. The landmines subcomponent will provide technical assistance to local and
national strategies and policies for education on the risk of antipersonnel mines and
UXO, and to those providing care for child and adolescent victims. The
protection/displaced component will strengthen national and local capacity to
guarantee the rights to survival, development and protection of children who are
displaced or affected by humanitarian situations resulting from violence by ill egal
armed groups and from natural disasters, within the framework of the UNICEF
CCC. This subcomponent will also strengthen national capacity to monitor grave
violations of children’s rights and infringements of international humanitarian law.
The protection/violence subcomponent will provide technical assistance to
strengthen national and local capacity to protect children and adolescents from
violence, exploitation and abuse, in accordance with national policies, plans and
programmes and the Child and Adolescent Code, and in line with the
recommendations of the United Nations Secretary-General’s Study on Violence
against Children. Special attention will be paid to gender-based violence in all
interventions. Technical assistance will also be provided to institutions responsible
for implementing the new Child and Adolescent Code, with emphasis on creating a
juvenile justice system. UNICEF will support ongoing efforts for the approval and
implementation of new legislation to prevent violence against women and to
eradicate child labour and commercial sexual exploitation. The implementation of
timely birth registration will be promoted, focusing especially on vulnerable
populations.
46. Expected results include: (a) a total of 95 per cent of children under one h ave
civil birth registrations; (b) a total of 70 per cent of all children and adolescents
demobilized from illegal armed groups have access to non-institutionalized
programmes, allowing them to receive health, education, protection and
reintegration services while living with their families; (c) 20,000 families and their
communities develop capacities to prevent APM/UXO related accidents; (d) 80 per
cent of all new civil victims of APM/UXO, their families and communities know
their rights and access mechanisms to receive support and care; (e) 100 per cent of
all adolescents in conflict with the law are judged under the juvenile justice system
as established in the Child and Adolescent Code; (f) an increased number of
adolescents in 11 priority departments have knowledge of their rights and develop
skills for the prevention of violence, exploitation and abuse; (g) children and
adolescents are protected by a legal framework that adequately penalizes sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse against children; (h) children and adolescents with
disabilities are protected by an adequate legal framework that is in conformity with
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; and (i) public servants
and members of society have increased knowledge of and comply with the Child
and Adolescent Code; (j) 50 per cent of all children and adolescents affected by
internal displacement and/or natural disasters access health, education and
protection services.
47. Component 4: evidence-based public policies includes three subcomponents:
knowledge management; monitoring and evaluation; public policies; and

11

communication and mobilization. Under this cross-cutting component, UNICEF will
strengthen State and civil society commitment and capacity, at national and local
levels, to child rights, poverty reduction and strengthened participation by children
and adolescents. The component will promote more democratic relations in various
contexts (family, school, community) in survival, development, protection and
participation, and is expected to develop capacities for influencing the entire cycle
of public policies by providing technical support to making child rights a priority in
public policy and budgets.
48. Knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation will help generate and
analyse disaggregated data, support participatory monitoring of the situation of
children, including at community level, and will help to identify and systematize
good practices and lessons learned. Public policies aims at using strategic
information and data as a basis for formulating, implementing and evaluating
effective public policies to implement child rights and the Millennium Development
Goals, particularly among vulnerable populations. Technical assistance will be
provided at the national and local levels to increase the amount, quality and equity
of public social spending and the transparency of the budgeting process.
49. These strategies will be implemented in parallel with communication, social
mobilization and private sector activities, grouped together in the communication
and mobilization subcomponent. UNICEF will support key communication and
social mobilization strategies to inform, advocate and mobilize the actions of
governments, legislators, the judiciary, civil society, the media, the pr ivate sector
and stakeholders, including children and adolescents, to ensure the priority of
children in public policies.
50. UNICEF will promote the social responsibility of private sector and its
involvement as a key actor in public policies affecting c hildren. UNICEF will also
work with mass media and advertising agencies to enhance their awareness of child
and women’s rights and enlist them as allies for child rights.
51. Expected results include: (a) children’s rights are prioritized in public policie s
and social investment at the national, departmental and municipal levels; (b) all
Departmental Development Plans (2008-2011) incorporate child rights and actions
for their promotion and protection, along with the required budgetary resources;
(c) a total of 60 per cent of the main childhood programmes, the Institutional
Education Plans, and the Departmental Development Plans in 11 departments are
designed and managed with the active participation of children and adolescents, and
a national network of children and adolescents participation is formed to influence
policy in areas that concern them; (d) public social spending for children is
increased by 5 per cent in at least 11 departments; (e) in at least 11 departments,
DevInfo is used to compile, analyse and disseminate data for monitoring the
Millennium Development Goals and inform public policy; and (f) the number of
businesses adopting Corporate Social Responsibility programmes on children and
adolescents is increased.
Cross-sectoral costs
52. These will cover recurrent costs for activities supporting overall programme
execution, including staff salaries and technical assistance, monitoring and
evaluation-related travel, and office supplies.

12

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
53. The programme will be monitored through semi-annual and annual programme
implementation reviews, as well as through regular field monitoring and periodic
analyses with partners at all levels. All monitoring, research and evaluation
activities will align with the UNDAF five-year Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan, and an MTR will be performed jointly with the Government in
2010. Government counterparts will include Acción Social (the Presidential office
responsible for international cooperation), the National Statistical Institute, sectoral
Ministries, and local government and departmental planning offices.
54. As recommended in the 2005 MTR, UNICEF will give greater attention to
internal monitoring and evaluation functions, including collecting and analy sing
disaggregated data, programme evaluation, and the periodic systematization of
lessons learned. The new country programme will also focus on strengthening
capacity at the local and national levels to generate data and to monitor and evaluate
policies, plans and programmes regarding the rights of children and adolescents.
UNICEF will provide technical support for the adoption of DevInfo at the
departmental level.
55. As also recommended by the MTR (see paragraph 27), UNICEF will establish
a decentralized field presence to strengthen programme implementation, monitoring,
response to emergencies, access to rural communities and harmonization with other
United Nations agencies in the field.

13

