Republic of the Congo
Country programme document
2014-2018

The draft country programme document for the Republic of
the Congo (E/ICEF/2013/P/L.5) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2013 annual session (1821 June 2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 September 2013.

Basic data†
(2011, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

1/1
99
11
12/11, 8/15, 13/5
560 a

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2010)

71

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2010)

18

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

90 b

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

90 b

Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)

92/89 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female)

93/92 c

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, male/female, 2005)

3.3

Prevalence rate among pregnant women (%, 2009)

2.8

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female, 2005)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2005)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

b

c

d

24/25
81 d
81/81, 88/75, 69/91
2 270

More comprehensive country data on children and women, and methodological notes on
estimates, are available at www.childinfo.org/.
The figure given in the above table is the adjusted maternal mortality ratio calculated by the
United Nations Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. The estimate reported
by the country is 781 deaths per 100,000 live births (2005), as indicated in the 2005
Demographic and Health Survey. The 2011-2012 Demographic and Health Survey shows an
improvement in some indicators, but the data have not yet been validated.
The immunization figures given in the above table are the inter-agency estimates developed
by the World Health Organization (WHO)/UNICEF. The gender breakdown according to the
2005 Demographic and Health Survey is as follows: DPT3: male 68 per cent, female 69 per
cent; measles: male 64 per cent, female 69 per cent.
The estimate for this education indicator is based on data from the survey of nationally
representative households rather than on administrative data.
Refers to children registered between the ages of 0 and 9, rather than the standard age range
of 0 to 4.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The Congo, a middle-income Central African country with a highly urbanized
(67 per cent) population of 4.1 million (annual growth of 2.7 per cent), is making
strenuous efforts to accelerate its development. However, its progress is constantly
threatened by recurring emergencies, weaknesses in governance and decentralization,
and a still-developing pool of human capital. With average annual economic growth
of 6 per cent between 2005 and 2011, in 2010 the country reached the completion
point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The economy is largely
oil-based but there is a trend towards diversification; the mining sector in particular
is very promising. Although the Congo has an overall budget surplus and
considerable fiscal space, its poverty rate stands at 46 per cent and is especially high

2

among people living in rural areas (75 per cent), children (48 per cent), female headed households and indigenous populations.
2.
In recent years, the country has benefited from the consolidation of peace and
security and from a degree of political stability (presidential elections in 2009 and
legislative elections in 2010). However, it has been affected by conflicts in
neighbouring countries (since 2009, 134,000 refugees have fled to Likoua la from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 40,000 of whom have returned home);
outbreaks of polio in 2010 (causing 206 deaths, particularly in the 15 -25 age group)
and of measles and cholera in 2011 and 2012; and a number of accidents (train and
plane crashes) and an ammunition stock explosion in Brazzaville in 2012, causing at
least 220 deaths and leaving 17,000 homeless (official source).
3.
Efforts have been made to improve access to basic social services through the
adoption in 2007 of fee-free measures, a 66-per-cent increase in the health budget in
2012 (the Year of Health) and a 10-per-cent increase in the education budget
between 2011 and 2012, but the progress made in social indicators masks significant
geographical, rural/urban, interurban, economic, ethnic and gender disparities. The
children who are most deprived of their rights 1 live in six departments, three of
which (Likouala, Sangha and Lékoumou) are home to the majority of the country’s
indigenous population. Targeted programmes have improved their situation, but
indigenous populations are still discriminated against and particularly vulnerable,
with rates of access to services two to three times lower than those of other groups:
their school enrolment ratio is 44 per cent, while their civil registration rate is 32 per
cent.
4.
The country is on track to achieve goals 4 and 5 of the Millennium
Development Goals in 2015. Maternal mortality has decreased from 781 deaths per
100,000 live births in 2005 to 560 in 2010. It remains high, howe ver, despite high
rates of antenatal care (88 per cent in 2005 and 93 per cent in 2011) and births
attended by skilled health personnel. The infant and child mortality rate fell from
126 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2006 to 99 in 2011, as a result of th e use of
mosquito nets, the improvement in maternal and neonatal health care, and advanced
strategies. 2 Although the majority of births take place in hospital wards, neonatal
mortality, caused mainly by premature birth, asphyxia and infection, accounts for
over 50 per cent of deaths among children under 1 year of age. The other causes of
infant and child mortality are malaria, diarrhoea and pneumonia.
5.
Dietary and breastfeeding practices, inadequate nutritional knowledge among
mothers and the limited number of fortified products lead to micronutrient
deficiencies and increase the incidence of malnutrition. Although acute malnutrition
decreased slightly between 2005 and 2011, from 8 per cent to 6 per cent, and
chronic malnutrition decreased over the same period from 24 per cent to 20 per cent,
anaemia increased among children and, in particular, among pregnant women (from
60 per cent to 69 per cent), while exclusive breastfeeding rose only slightly, from
__________________
1

2

These departments have privation scores equal to or greater than 30 per cent (aggregate of
seven indicators: percentage rates of chronic malnutrition, non-enrolment in primary school,
non-immunization with diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT3) vaccine, unattended births, lack
of HIV awareness, non-use of latrines, and unregistered births).
Secondary analysis of data from the 2011 Demographic and Health Survey (UNICEF West and
Central Africa Regional Office, 2013).

3

19 per cent to 21 per cent. Disparities between rich and poor and among
departments are large.
6.
Seventy-seven thousand people, including 40,000 women and 7,900 children,
are infected with HIV. Within any given age cohort, twice as many women as men
are infected, and prevalence is higher in urban areas and in certain departments. In
2011, 86 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women still had no access to
antiretroviral drugs, and paediatric care is increasing slowly (44 per cent).
7.
Only 71 per cent of households, particularly in urban areas, use a source o f
safe drinking water, and only 18 per cent use an appropriate excreta disposal system.
Poor hygiene conditions and practices in urban areas have resulted in recurrent
cholera and polio epidemics. The lack of a national sanitation policy and appropriate
institutional frameworks is an obstacle to progress.
8.
Early pregnancy, sociocultural norms and the low status of women and girls
limit the exercise of their rights, accentuate their vulnerability and increase maternal,
infant and child deaths and HIV infection. Progress is hindered by the ineffective
national health system, the poor functioning of the central drug procurement and
distribution agency, financial barriers, insufficiently stimulated demand for services
and little systematic and holistic application of essential family practices.
9.
The lack of qualified teachers and the shortcomings in the system’s
governance mean that the right of children to high-quality, inclusive and universal
education is not ensured. Between 2005 and 2011, the primary sc hool net enrolment
ratio increased from 87 per cent to 89 per cent and the primary completion rate rose
from 66 per cent to 92 per cent, while the gender parity index (in secondary
education) fell from 0.97 to 0.81. The transition to secondary education an d the
completion rate at that level (especially for girls) are bottlenecks, in particular
because of the early pregnancy rate (50 per cent among 15 -year-olds).
10. Despite the adoption of the Child Protection Act and the Act on the Promotion
and Protection of the Rights of Indigenous Populations (the first of its kind in
Africa), the protection of children and the exercise of their rights remain a matter of
concern. Recent studies show a relative decrease in the number of homeless children,
from 1,900 in 2003 to 910 in 2009, but the scale of trafficking in children is not well
known, although it is estimated that 1,800 children are victims of internal and cross border trafficking in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. The civil registration rate for
children under the age of 5 is high (81 per cent), but 14 per cent of such children
(22 per cent in rural areas and 9 per cent in urban areas) have no birth certificate.
11. Despite the country’s wealth and the progress it has made, development
indicators for the Congo remain similar to those of low-income countries because of
systemic weaknesses in programme areas and national policies, insufficient budget
allocation/implementation rates in the social sectors, poor systems management and
inequitable distribution of wealth and services. It is therefore necessary to better
realign programmes with a more equitable development approach in order to ensure
that the most vulnerable, women and children can take advantage of opportunities
and duly exercise their rights and strategic interests.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2009-2013
Key results achieved
12. In the field of social policy, UNICEF has successfully served as a catalyst for
the promotion of a non-contributory social protection system. Since 2009, the
generation of strategic information has fed into evidence -based advocacy and
political dialogue, leading to tangible results: the Government’s adoption of the
social action policy, a pilot project on social transfers that is being co -financed by
the World Bank and the Government, with technical support from UNICEF.
13. The scaling-up of high-impact child survival interventions has been
encouraged and supported by UNICEF in conjunction with the Government, civil
society and other development partners. As a result: (a) 76 3 per cent of households
have received mosquito nets; (b) 15,000 families have been made aware of essential
family practices by 1,500 trained outreach workers; (c) immunization coverage has
increased from 66 per cent to 90 per cent; (d) 75 per cent of children have received
vitamin A supplementation; (e) 124 antenatal care facilities offer services for the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission; and (f) open defecation has ceased in
187 villages with a total population of 102,461, within the context of the
community-led total sanitation initiative.
14. Studies on the cost of free schooling, schools applying the observer, réfléchir,
agir (observe, think, act) (ORA) methodology for indigenous populations and
school enrolment for girls were taken into account in the development of the
national education strategy, which served as the foundation for the plan of action
under the Global Partnership for Education. The implementation of the child friendly, girl-friendly school model in 50 schools is allowing 37,000 students to
learn and fulfil their potential in an appropriate environment.
15. The programme has contributed to the improvement of the legal framework
(the Child Protection Act and the Act on the Promotion and Pro tection of the Rights
of Indigenous Populations), the organization of the universal periodic review, the
Government’s signing of a bilateral agreement with Benin on child trafficking and
the Congo’s membership of the United Nations Human Rights Council and the
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
16. Political and social recognition of indigenous issues has strengthened under
the leadership of UNICEF, and has brought together various ministries and agencies
of the United Nations system. Mobile strategies targeting indigenous populations
have made it possible to register the births of 5,000 children, train 300 young people
in life skills and HIV, and improve the education resources offered to 2,169 children
(including 650 girls) in ORA schools, compared with 1,543 children (including
654 girls) in 2009.
17. The programme’s capacity to provide a prompt, effective and multifaceted
response to emergencies has gradually improved, as demonstrated in 2012 following
the explosions at an ammunition depot (psychosocial support, child-friendly spaces,
__________________
3

Technical report on the universal distribution campaign of insecticide impregnated bed net –
National Programme for Malaria Control – Ministry of Health – August 2012

5

water and sanitation facilities, support for education, nutritional surveillance and
education, and innovation, with the inclusion of risk education for children).
Lessons learned
18. Long-term contracting has allowed UNICEF to receive high-level technical
assistance and help the Government to develop the national social action policy and
the non-contributory social protection system. This initiative has been successful
because it was based on a dynamic workplan, the same consultant was used for the
three years of ad hoc support, and UNICEF staff have directly provided additional
ongoing technical support. In following such an approach, however, UNICEF must
ensure that the importance of its strategic role and technical support remains clearly
perceived, valued and sought by the Government and the other partners.
19. Mobile and advanced strategies are not in themselves enough to ensure
immunization coverage above 90 per cent, since children in the last 1 0 per cent are
harder to reach. It is therefore necessary to strengthen both routine initiatives and
alternative and innovative strategies, based on a strong social mobilization
component.
20. Breastfeeding did not increase significantly between 2005 and 2011 (from
19 per cent to 21 per cent), despite awareness-raising measures, social mobilization
and the inclusion of breastfeeding promotion in the community outreach service
package. Detailed knowledge of the obstacles to the promotion of breastfeeding i s
needed.
21. It is necessary to make better use of the experience gained (anti -trafficking
measures, birth registration, rehabilitation of street children) by reorienting the
programme towards the implementation of a child protection system.
22. New initiatives have been introduced within the programme (child -friendly
schools, girl-friendly schools, mobile and integrated approaches), but their use to
influence scaling up has been hindered by the lack of any formal mechanisms for
systematic documentation and assessment. The ORA school assessment indicated
that UNICEF should not confine itself to that model alone and recommended that it
should explore alternative strategies (mobile or seasonal schools) more suited to the
children’s way of life.

The country programme, 2014-2018
Summary budget
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other resources

Total

Social policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation

1 500

6 500

8 000

Child survival and development

1 500

15 500

17 000

Education and gender equality

1 000

10 500

11 500

Child protection

1 225

7 500

8 725

275

1 000

1 275

Programme

Cross-sectoral
Communication for development

6

(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programme

Regular
resources

Other resources

Total

645

4 000

4 645

6 145

45 000

51 145

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
23. The 2014-2018 cooperation programme is the outcome of a participatory
process conducted under the joint leadership of the Government and UNICEF
through the national Country Programme Coordinating Committee, chaired by the
Director-General of Planning. The rights-, gender- and equity-based analysis of the
situation of children and women has provided input to the discussions at sectoral
meetings, planning workshops and strategy sessions involving civil society
(including representatives of organizations of young people, women and indigenous
populations), the United Nations system, development partners and the UNICEF
Regional Office. Group discussions with 60 young people (including 30 girls) and
seven associations ensured that the stakeholders could particip ate fully and that their
needs were taken into account.
Programme components, results and strategies
24. The 2014-2018 cooperation programme will contribute equitably to the
acceleration of progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan for 2014-2017 and the exercise of the rights of children,
in particular the most vulnerable children, in the following priority areas: child
survival and development; education; protection and vulnerability reduction;
anti-discrimination; and analysis, generation and use of factual data and knowledge
for evidence-based programme implementation and for bolstering advocacy at the
national level.
Social policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation
25. The aim of this component is to ensure that, by 2018, girls and boys in the
most vulnerable areas will benefit from inclusive social policies and increased
resources owing to evidence-based advocacy. It will support the other programme
components in the formulation, analysis and monitoring of child-friendly sectoral
policies and strategies focused on equity, including the non-contributory social
protection system and fee-free measures. It will also stress the development of
national capacities for (a) social planning and budgeting t hrough capacity-building
for the preparation of the medium-term expenditure frameworks of the social
ministries, and (b) good governance and accountability (budget analysis and
traceability of public expenditure). Evidence-based advocacy and political dialogue,
as well as modelling, will be carried out with a view to increasing social budgets,
scaling up successful experiences and implementing sectoral approaches. To support
the decentralization process, the programme will influence capacity-building for
local government authorities in the development, implementation and monitoring of
child-sensitive participatory local plans, results-based management, the rights-,
gender- and equity-based approach, the mobilization of local resources and the
decentralized monitoring of bottlenecks.

7

Child survival and development
26. The new programme will be based on the initiative “A Promise Renewed” to
step up progress towards goals 4 and 5 of the Millennium Development Goals by
2015 and consolidate gains in the post-2015 agenda. It will be structured around the
following major cross-sectoral strategic areas: (a) support for policies and budgeting;
(b) revitalization of public health districts; (c) community approaches; and
(d) communication for development. This component consists of four subcomponents.
Maternal and child health
27. To ensure that by the end of 2018 at least 90 per cent of pregnant women,
mothers and children under age 5 in the most vulnerable areas have access to and
are using a package of high-impact, quality interventions for survival during and
after childbirth and for the prevention and treatment of avoidable diseases in
children under 5, the programme will concentrate on the following: (a) intensified
basic emergency obstetric and neonatal care and quality postnatal care for the
prevention, early detection and effective treatment of life -threatening complications
in newborns; (b) accelerated scaling-up of high-impact interventions; (c) intensified
actions to combat malaria, diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections;
(d) reinforcement of routine immunization combined with the promotion of
strategies targeting the hardest-to-reach 10 per cent; (e) use of new technologies
(mobile phones); (f) intensified comprehensive treatment of childhood di seases (in
clinical and community settings); (g) support for fee-free health measures and the
gradual establishment of a universal health insurance system; and (h) integration of
community outreach workers into the health system.
Nutrition
28. Cross-sectoral strategies will be given priority to ensure that, by 2018, 90 per
cent of children under 5 and pregnant and breastfeeding women, especially the most
vulnerable, will have improved nutritional status and that girls and boys enjoy
optimal growth. Strategically, the programme will support implementation of the
Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) and Renewed Efforts Against Child Hunger (REACH)
initiatives to eliminate child hunger, and will also support the essential package of
nutrition interventions, the scaling-up of supplementary feeding and actions to
combat micronutrient deficiencies through supplementation and food fortification,
including in the home. A realignment of interventions based on qualitative studies
and analysis of bottlenecks will facilitate an increase in the exclusive breastfeeding
rate.
Measures to combat HIV
29. By 2018, at least 90 per cent of eligible pregnant women, children and
adolescents in the targeted areas, especially the most vulnerable among them, should
be using HIV prevention and treatment services. The programme will therefore
support the implementation of: (a) the plan for eliminating mother-to-child
transmission; (b) an HIV prevention policy both within and outside schools for
those adolescents most at risk; (c) a national treatment strategy for infected children,
especially adolescent boys and girls; (d) mainstreaming of HIV in social protection
policies and measures; and (e) HIV screening during antenatal care visits at private

8

medical facilities in Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville, which serve more than 50 per
cent of pregnant women.
Water, hygiene and sanitation
30. The programme will support the mobilization of national and local resources
and the implementation of the national water, hygiene and sanitation plan, throu gh
strategies adapted to urban, peri-urban and rural settings, to ensure that 85 per cent
of the rural, peri-urban and urban populations are using safe water and that sanitary
facilities are available to and used by 30 per cent of the population. More
specifically, this will include (a) infrastructure surveys and support for infrastructure
construction and renovation; (b) promotion of community management committees
to ensure investment sustainability; (c) scaling-up of community-led total sanitation
and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities in schools; (d) modelling of
low-cost, non-polluting latrines; and (e) promotion of in-home water treatment.
Education and gender equality
31. The programme will help to meet the two main challenges facing the national
education system (lack of equitable access and low quality of services) to ensure
that girls and boys are school-ready and are able to complete an inclusive,
high-quality education. Overall, it will support processes related to education refo rm,
development and implementation of the Global Partnership for Education and
promotion of in-school medical visits in collaboration with the health sector.
32. To improve equitable access and allow 100 per cent of children and
adolescents (both boys and girls) not enrolled in school to benefit from alternative
forms of education, the programme will carry out studies to (a) improve
understanding of the barriers to access, retention and success faced by the most
vulnerable; and (b) identify alternative forms of education, including skills training,
for children not enrolled in school, especially indigenous children and girls. It will
support the elaboration of a more inclusive national education policy and its
integration into local development plans, implementation of school enrolment
initiatives for girls, non-formal education and fee-free measures.
33. To guarantee quality education for all and a girls’ secondary school completion
rate of 70 per cent, the programme will support: (a) development and
implementation of a national early childhood policy; and (b) modelling and scaling up of the child-friendly, girl-friendly school approach and early-childhood learning
activities, through parental education and community outreach on education. For
lower secondary school, interventions will focus on: (a) improved awareness of
bottlenecks affecting the quality of formal and non-formal education and the
retention of girls in secondary school; (b) development and implementation of a
national teachers’ continuing education policy and strategy; (c) children’s
participation in school life; (d) gender and life skills training for teachers;
(e) advocacy and support for experimentation and development of a more
workplace-oriented educational system, especially for girls; and (f) civil society and
community empowerment, teachers training and availability of adequate school
facilities to improve child-friendly learning environment and quality of institutions.
Child protection

9

34. The goal is to ensure that by 2018, 50 per cent of girls and boys, especially the
most vulnerable, will be better protected against violence, exploitation and
discrimination. High-level advocacy will be carried out to create a political
environment conducive to child protection and strengthen the regulatory framework
for the enforcement of existing protection laws. The programme will focus on
support for the national social action information system, mainstreaming of child
rights protection in training programmes (especially for the police and gendarmerie)
and local development plans; regular submission of alternative reports at the
international level; support for a more child-sensitive legal system; and
implementation of the national social action and birth registration plan.
35. The establishment of a national child protection system as part of the national
social action plan will strengthen the gains made in the political and legal spheres.
Organizing communities around more functional formal and non-formal structures
and changing social norms, including by enhancing the social status of indigenous
populations, will be key elements of the new programme. An integrated model for
child protection, including during emergencies, will be developed. A strategic
partnership will be established with the Government, the education sector and civil
society to support approaches leading to the empowerment of girls and boys who are
not in school.
Cross-sectoral
36. At the programme level, communication for development will be the
subcomponent and the cross-cutting strategy within all the components and will be
mainstreamed in national policies. It will be oriented primarily towards:
(a) qualitative/quantitative studies to achieve greater knowledge of the sociocultural
and behavioural factors that create bottlenecks hampering access to and use of
services; (b) identification of influence networks; (c) strengthened partnership with
the Government, civil society (including youth networks) and the media;
(d) intensification of a participatory and inclusive community approach; (e) partner
capacity-building; (f) scaling-up of life-saving skills; and (g) advocacy with various
ministries to create a budget line for communication. The public relations
component will aim to increase the visibility of activities an d advances.
37. Cross-cutting costs will support operational and logistical costs (equipment,
supplies) related to the operations of the two offices (in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire), as well as managerial capacity-building, both internally and with partners
(harmonized approach to cash transfers). Such funds will also cover salaries.
38. Social policies (at the macro level) will be the main focus of the programme.
All programme components will include support for the development of evidence based social policies and budgeting to facilitate the appropriate allocation of
national resources to social sectors and the effective use of those resources. The
emphasis will be on high-level technical assistance to support the Government.
Interventions at the operational level (meso/micro) will target a limited number of
departments and districts, demonstration and modelling zones that are
representative of the problems hampering the full realization of girls’, boys’ and
women’s rights (urbanization, neonatal mortality, poverty rates, rates of deprivation
of rights). The following strategies will be given priority.
39. Capacity-building: the programme will work on strengthening the
capacities of decentralized and local offices (four departments in urban and rural

10

settings), local authorities, the Government and civil society for (a) the development
of child-sensitive and gender-sensitive departmental plans; (b) the drafting of
sectoral budgets (central and local levels); and (c) the strengthening of systems for
real-time monitoring of progress in reducing bottlenecks and building resilience in
vulnerable communities. The capacities of UNICEF and its partners to mainstream
gender, rights and equity in sectoral policies and programmes will be developed in
accordance with gender audit recommendations.
40. Factual data production, research and knowledge management: the
community-level (micro) and intermediate-level (meso) response will be in the form
of pilot projects in collaboration with the Government and real -time monitoring of
the progress made in reducing disparities and bottlenecks in supply, demand and the
environment. These pilot projects will be assessed and systematically documented,
budgeted and modelled to produce factual data. Those that are most effective, in
terms of change, will serve as models for evidence-based advocacy, political
dialogue and scaling-up by the Government. Long-term contracts with specialized
institutions and promotion of South-South cooperation will be used in additional
studies. Area office involvement will be bolstered for decentralized follow-up and
modelling in urban settings.
41. Political dialogue, advocacy and communication: the programme will
continue its activities and better communicate its successes, as well as strengthening
strategic partnerships.
42. Innovation: innovation will be encouraged through the use of new
technologies (mobile phones, solar energy, modern latrines, innovative water filters)
and the development of strategic partnerships with the private sector and national
and international academic institutions.
43. Direct service delivery: this will be limited and will take place mainly
through non-governmental organizations and associations, as well as in emergencies.
Responsibility for distributing inputs and for immuniz ation will gradually be handed
over to the Government on the basis of joint planning.
44. Communication for development: this will be mainstreamed in all strategies
for improved understanding of the sociocultural determinants of the adoption of key
practices and barriers to the use of services and programme performance.
45. Urban approaches: the rapid urbanization of the Congo is at once an
opportunity and a challenge, owing to pockets of poverty and increased vulnerability
in peri-urban areas. Cross-sectoral urban strategies will be implemented in all
programme components. Community participation, cottage industries for young
people (especially girls) and prevention and management of certain infectious
diseases that spread easily in urban settings (cholera and malaria) will be explored.
Relationship to national priorities and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF)
46. The UNICEF-Congo country programme is aligned with the UNDAF (2014 2018), and both are, in turn, aligned with and support the implementation of the
national priorities set forth in book II of the National Development Plan and the
Poverty Reduction, Growth and Employment Strategy Paper, specifically in relation
to the following pillars: (a) governance; (b) social develop ment and inclusion; and
(c) balanced, sustainable development. Through their alignment with the UNDAF,

11

the interventions of the UNICEF-Congo cooperation programme for 2014-2018 will
essentially help to produce the following effects: (a) departmental admini strations
and communities will take ownership of local development; (b) the most vulnerable
groups will have quality basic social services and appropriate financial services; and
(c) vulnerable groups will have the benefit of a non-contributory social protection
floor.
Relationship to international priorities
47. The programme is aligned with the strategic outcomes of the 2014 -2017
medium-term strategic plan. It is part of the efforts to accelerate the achievement of
goals 4, 5 and 6 of the Millennium Development Goals and of continued actions in
support of the implementation of other major cross-sectoral priorities, including “A
Promise Renewed”, elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, the SUN
initiative, the Global Partnership for Education and the Global Initiative on Out-ofSchool Children (goals 2 and 3). By promoting equity, rights and protection for
children, the programme contributes to national outcomes related to the primary
commitments contained in the Convention on the Rights of th e Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
48. Emergency preparedness and response, support for the development and
implementation of the national and sectoral contingency plan and the strengthening
of the non-contributory social protection system have been included as strategic
dimensions of all the programme components in order to ensure an effective
response to crises and to improve the resilience of vulnerable populations.
49. Environmental impact: the activities proposed in this programme (drilling,
low-flow water wells and construction of shallow pit latrines) do not require an
environmental impact study. During implementation, environmental issues will
receive special attention, in cooperation with the relevant governmental bodies, and
wells and latrines will be appropriately spaced.
Major partnerships
50. Strategic alliances within the United Nations system (World Health
Organization, United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization) and with the Government, civil society and
international institutions (European Union, World Bank) will be strengthened in
order to support international priorities, child -friendly budgeting and improved
monitoring of public expenditure. The partnership concerning indigenous
populations will be broadened and strengthened. Through the UNDAF, joint
programmes (Millennium Villages) and a coordinated emergency response will help
to strengthen partnership within the United Nations. New alliances and more
targeted partnerships will be developed (private sector, Ministry of Finance) to raise
non-regular resources. Catalytic funds are nevertheless necessary for gathering
reliable data, using them to raise national resources and suppo rting scaling-up. The
Government of Japan and the European Union are the key donors and technical
partners. Other possible sources of financing include the United Nations Trust Fund
for Human Security, the Global Partnership for Education and the United Na tions
Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management

12

51. Programme component outcomes and key indicators are defined in the results
matrix and will serve as the basis for the integrated monitoring and evaluation plan
aligned with the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation plan. The programme will be
implemented under the general coordination of the Ministry of Planning; follow -up
and necessary readjustments will be performed on a participatory basis (duty bearers and rights-holders) through joint Government-UNICEF reviews and the
mid-term review. The National Centre for Statistics and Economic Research will
receive support for the conduct of national surveys (a demographic and health
survey, the Congolese household survey, a multiple-indicator cluster survey, a
seroprevalence survey and an AIDS indicators survey) and for the implementation
of a centralized and harmonized socioeconomic database. Operational research
(pre- and post-intervention data collection) and the systematic documentation and
evaluation of pilot projects will build the programme’s capacity to influence scaling up of successful experiences. Functional mechanisms will be established for the
periodic follow-up of international conventions and commitments. The harmonized
approach to cash transfers will be the tool used to optimize the management of
financial resources and to minimize risks.

13

