Côte d’Ivoire
Country programme document
2009-2013

The draft country programme document for Côte d’Ivoire
(E/ICEF/2008/P/L.21) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2008 second regular session (15-18
September 2008).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 5 February 2009.

Basic data†
(2006 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

9.2

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

127

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1998-2005)*
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female)

20
540
66/57

Primary schoolchildren reaching grade 5 (%)

92

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2004)

84

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2004)

37

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2005)

7.1

Child work (%, children 5 to 14 years old)
GNI per capita (US$)

35
870

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

77

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

73

† More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at
http://www.unicef.org/.
* This figure is a 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank,
which is adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths.

The situation of children and women
1.
The population of Côte d’Ivoire, as of June 2008, is estimated at 20.6 million,
with 47 per cent living in urban areas. Some 52 per cent of the Ivorian population is
younger than 18 years, including 18 per cent under the age of five. Life expectancy
is estimated at 51 years (National Institute for Statistics).
2.
The political crisis that broke out in September 2002 resulted in an armed
conflict that divided the country into two zones, with the South under government
control and the North, comprising the centre, north and west zones, under the
control of the Forces Nouvelles.
3.
The Ouagadougou Peace Agreement of 4 March 2007 has led to the
elimination of the ‘Confidence Zone’ that separated the two zones, as well as the
partial disarmament of the militia in the west of the country; internally displaced
persons have begun to return to their areas of origin. Despite delays in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and the redeployment of the
administration, the Agreement seems to have contributed to a stabilization of the
political situation — a stabilization to which the country programme aims to
contribute, within the context of national peacebuilding and recovery. Presidential
elections, planned for the Fall of 2008, should contribute to a further stabilization
and recovery, provided that these are held in a free and fair manner.
4.
If present trends continue, the country will only have the potential to achieve
one target of Millennium Development Goal 7 (reduce by half the proportion of
people without sustainable access to safe drinking water).

2

5.
The political crisis has made achievement of Millennium Development Goal 1
more difficult, as the level of human development has deteriorated (ranked 166 out
of 177 countries on the Human Development Index in 2006, compared to 156 out of
177 countries in 2002). The percentage of the poor is currently estimated at more
than 40 per cent, compared to 38 per cent in 2002.
6.
Acute malnutrition affects 270,000 children under the age of five (or seven per
cent of this age group). The majority can be found in the North, where the
emergency threshold has been exceeded, with 12 per cent of children affected, and
where 20 per cent of the children under the age of five are moderately or severely
underweight. The prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding is only 4 per cent. The
worsening of the nutritional situation of children may be attributed to cyclical food
insecurity, poor eating habits and the general decline of the health system, but also
to illiteracy, overburdening of mothers and impoverishment of the population. The
situation has been further worsened by the rise in prices for staple food s, such as
rice and maize, which witnessed price increases of 78 per cent and 92 per cent,
respectively, between March 2007 and March 2008. The continued food crisis will
affect the already precarious nutritional status of the most vulnerable groups.
7.
Concerning Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3, nearly one out of three
children aged 6 to 11 does not go to school, with a serious gap between boys and
girls (66 per cent compared to 57 per cent) and between urban and rural areas
(72 per cent compared to 56 per cent) in 2006. The primary school net attendance
rate increased from 58 per cent in 2000 to 62 per cent in 2006. Out of 100 children
who enter the first grade, 92 reach fifth grade (multiple indicator cluster survey
2006). The inadequate resources allocated to education by the State, the shortages in
the supply side for education (availability of safe, accessible schools, employment
possibilities for women or educational information for families), the low level of
training for teachers, the high cost of education for families and the community, as
well as child labour, are the main obstacles to the schooling of children, particularly
girls, and to quality of education.
8.
Concerning Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 7, infant - and under-five
mortality rates remain high (91 per 1,000 live births and 127 per 1,000 live births,
respectively). Malaria is the main cause of mortality among children under the age
of five, followed by diarrhoea and respiratory infections. However, the coverage of
insecticide-treated mosquito nets in households is only 10 per cent, with only 3 per
cent of effective use among children under the age of five. Access to drinking water,
which was 82 per cent in 2000, fell to 76 per cent in 2006, and only 57 per cent of
households have access to adequate excreta elimination and sanitation systems. A
number of factors affect the enjoyment of the rights of children and women to
survival: the failing health services, especially during the crisis; the inadequacy of
resources allocated by the State to the health sector (less than 5 per cent); the
widespread illiteracy of parents; the impoverishment of households; and the lack of
decision-making power of women. The maternal mortality ratio remains high (810
per 100,000 live births), mainly due to the low levels of access for pregnant women
to emergency obstetrical care (only 0.8 per cent of births in the country were by
caesarean delivery in 2000 and 3.6 per cent in the Abidjan region in 2004) and the
low rate of assisted child births (57 per cent).
9.
Concerning Millennium Development Goal 6, HIV prevalence rate is very
high, estimated at 4.7 per cent in 2005, with 6.4 per cent among women and 2.9 per

3

cent among men. AIDS has become the main cause of mortality among adults in
Côte d’Ivoire. The prevalence among young people aged 24 to 29 is 5.4 per cent and
2.5 per cent for youth aged 20 to 24 (AIDS Indicator Survey 2005). Less than 10 per
cent of the 540,000 orphans and other vulnerable children receive care and support.
HIV prevalence among pregnant women is 8 per cent; within that group, only one
out of 10 of these pregnant women living with HIV has access to the prevention of
mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) services. It is estimated that out of a total of
74,000 children infected with HIV, less than 4,000 have access to paediatric care
and only 2,000 benefit from antiretroviral treatment. Key factors in the vulnerability
to infection are the lack of knowledge on prevention among young people (only
18 per cent of women and 27.6 per cent of men have a comprehensive knowledge of
AIDS), low levels of condom use (29 per cent of young women and 42 per cent of
men use it during their first intercourse) and the low coverage of prevention, care
and support services.
10. Concerning child protection, more than 200 cases of child trafficking were
registered in 2006 and 2007. The National Study on Child Labour, carried out from
August to October 2005, estimates that 1.1 per cent of children aged 5 to 17 are
victims of trafficking. Nearly 45 per cent of children under the age of five were not
registered at the civil registry in 2006 (in the west and the northwest, 77 per cent
were not registered), compared to 28 per cent in 2000. Reasons for this include
isolation and poor functioning of the birth registration centres and ignorance of the
obligation to register on the part of the population. Although it is difficult to define
the extent of the phenomenon, an increase in cases of gender-based violence has
been observed. Many people in Côte d’Ivoire suffered sexual or physical violence at
the height of the crisis, with an upsurge in cases of collective rape committed by
servicemen. Some 36 per cent of adult women have suffered female genital
mutilation (in the north and, the northwest, the percentage is 88 per cent). Child
labour affects 22.2 per cent of children aged 5 to 17. Rapid urbanization,
promiscuity, breakdown of social solidarity, impoverishment of households, as well
as the large number of children and teenagers affected by the lack of prospec ts
within the context of conflict and insecurity, are all child protection problems to
which urgent solutions must be found.
11. The poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), the framework to operationalize
the Millennium Development Goals, was not finalized because of the crisis.
However, the development of the PRSP has recently resumed. Sector policies did
not aim to satisfy all the rights of children and women, and their internal resource
mobilization mechanisms proved inefficient. Expenditures made to mi tigate the
immediate consequences of the crisis have considerably reduced the capacity of the
Government to respond to investments in the social sectors and in the fight against
poverty. In 2007, expenditure for health was only 4.7 per cent of total govern ment
expenditure. The rights of vulnerable groups, notably those of children and women,
are not adequately taken into account in development programmes. There is no
explicit social policy for children and women, and sectoral national action plans for
women and children were never implemented. Furthermore, development planning
is still limited, due to the lack of data, making it impossible to assess adequately the
situation of children and women. A weakness in the monitoring and evaluation
function in the management of development programmes has also been observed.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2003-2008
Key results achieved
12. During the conflict, the previous country programme was mainly responding to
the crisis situation in the country. Activities focused mainly on providing assistance
to the conflict-affected population by improving access to basic social services and
contributing to the protection of the rights of children and women.
13. Under-five mortality has declined from 129 per 1,000 live births in 2005 to
127 per 1,000 live births in 2007 (State of the World’s Children 2008). The
restoration of health structures has contributed to this reduction: the health system,
which was disorganized in the centre, north and west zones, has gradually been
restored, thanks to financial contributions from development partners, particularly
the European Union, which supported the reopening of health structures, the
redeployment of health staff and the restoration of the cost -recovery system. Over
100 degraded or dilapidated primary health centres have been rehabilitated and 115
health structures have been equipped and the technical capacities of their staff
upgraded. The results registered in the area of the Expanded Programme on
Immunization Plus (EPI+) are very encouraging: no polio cases have been reported
since 2005; the number of measles cases has declined significantly; and the
coverage of vaccinations against diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus -hepatitis B-3 and
measles increased between 2000 and 2006. Major results were also registered in the
area of nutrition: a protocol on malnutrition management was developed; the
opening of seven therapeutic nutrition centres facilitated assistance to 3,000
severely malnourished children; vitamin A supplementation was intensified; and
access to iodized salt increased (from 31 to 84 per cent).
14. Between 2005 and 2007, hand pump repair led to a decrease in pump failure
rates, from 82 per cent to 26 per cent, in the intervention areas, result ing in
improved access to safe water for 1.2 million people. Some 180 villages in the
centre, north, west and southwest of the country have benefited from sanitation
works while over 144,000 primary school children have adopted good hygiene
practices, notably hand washing after toilet use and before meals, and are growing
up in a sound and favourable environment. The transmission of dracunculiasis has
been interrupted.
15. The action of the education sector group, led by UNICEF, with financial
support from the European Union, in 2006 enabled two million children (40 per cent
girls), including 80,000 displaced children, to go to school in the government controlled South, compared to 417,688 children (30 per cent girls) in the North.
Three back-to-school campaigns between 2005 and 2007, for the first time, resulted
in more than one million children returning to school and receiving school kits.
Since 2005, some 60,000 children have benefited from quality education through the
Child-Friendly School for Peace and Tolerance programme, based on the UNICEF
‘child-friendly schools’ concept. About 17,300 out-of-school children were able to
attend school as a result of the development of alternative learning programmes
implemented in partnership with non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
16. UNICEF supported the National Plan for Demobilization, Disarmament and
Reintegration and the Protection Programme for Vulnerable Children and
Adolescents, and collaborated with the United Nations system agencies and local

5

NGOs to provide psychosocial, medical and food assistance to 7,000 conflict affected children, (including 3,300 girls) and 2,900 children associated with armed
groups. Some 1,700 of these children have been reintegrated into the formal school
system. Thanks to intense advocacy, the recruitment of children by armed groups
has stopped. During the past two years, 174 children who were victims of trafficking
were offered assistance in close collaboration with the Ivorian Social Protection
Department, the International Organization for Migration, the International Catholic
Child Bureau and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation. More than 48,000
children without birth certificates have been registered at the Civil Registry.
17. Concerning PMTCT, 30 per cent of pregnant women receiving counselling
accepted voluntary testing and 70 per cent of the HIV-positive women amongst them
are receiving antiretroviral prophylaxis. The district approach has helped to
strengthen the capacities of 20 health districts and to develop an d integrate
micro-plans into the minimum activity package. In total, 20 per cent of health
structures in the intervention areas offer PMTCT services. More than 4,500 young
people visited and received advice in 10 new youth-friendly centres. More than 455
victims of sexual violence benefited from care and support in 2006. About 15,000
orphans and other vulnerable children benefited from quality care and support.
UNICEF provided support for the development of: standards and policies in the area
of PMTCT; the 2008-2010 plan for scaling up PMTCT and paediatric care; the
2007-2010 plan on HIV prevention among youth; the 2007-2010 strategic plan on
orphans and other vulnerable children; and the document on HIV integration at the
workplace.
Lessons learned
18. The Accelerated Child Survival and Development (ACSD) strategy was
adopted by the Government in 2007. However, the mobilization of partners and
resources around the strategy, to ensure the scaling-up, turned out to be insufficient,
and had a negative impact on the programme. Taking this into account, advocacy
will now be strengthened to ensure the adoption of the strategy by partners and a
strengthening of the institutional and partnership framework.
19. The recent experience with bridging classes and commu nity schools in the
areas with low school attendance rates (northeast, southwest and west), carried out
in partnership with the Ministry of Education, paved the way for a solution to the
delicate problem of the countless children who did not have access to education at
the required age (6-11 years). The advocacy of UNICEF with the Government
contributed to a recognition of these education strategies, which will enable many
children to realize their right to education, This demonstrates that there is a
possibility to link the non-formal education system to the formal system, thus
allowing thousands of children to be reintegrated into the formal school system and
further opening up new areas for action for the coming programme.
20. At the beginning of the 2003-2007 programme, the response by UNICEF to
the HIV/AIDS pandemic provided through the programmes for health and nutrition
(PMTCT and paediatric care), protection (orphans and other vulnerable children)
and education (prevention among young people) obtained modest results, due to
lack of coordination and leadership. To ensure greater efficiency, an HIV/AIDS
programme will be established in order to provide better coordination and an answer
commensurate with the magnitude of the pandemic and its devastating e ffects in

6

Côte d’Ivoire. In addition, the participation of teenagers will be increased in order to
channel their positive energy towards the protection and promotion of their rights.
This strategy will provide them with new prospects and save them from vio lence
and other harmful practices.

The country programme, 2009-2013
Summary budget table
(In United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Child survival

8 407 800

38 720 000

47 127 800

Basic education and gender equality

5 293 800

37 400 000

42 693 800

Child protection

4 048 200

11 000 000

15 048 200

HIV/AIDS and adolescents

3 114 000

11 000 000

14 114 000

Social policies, monitoring and evaluation

3 736 800

880 000

4 616 800

Cross-sectoral costs

6 539 400

11 000 000

17 539 400

31 140 000

110 000 000

141 140 000

Programme

Total

Preparation process
21. The CPD preparation process started with the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) workshop of June 2007, aimed at defining the
comparative advantages of the United Nations system and setting up the timetable
for elaboration of the UNDAF, followed by an in-depth situation analysis. In
February 2008, a five-day training on the human rights-based approach to
programming and on results-based management was held for 50 participants.
Particular emphasis was placed on the analysis of the roles and capacities of
stakeholders, as well as the analysis of the situation of children and women,
identifying key problems that the next country programme will he lp resolve. The
Ministry of Planning coordinated the entire process.
22. UNICEF, as a lead advocate for the protection of child rights, is well placed to
advance peace and security and to improve national recovery and reconstruction in
the country.
Goals, key results and strategies
23. The objective of the new country programme is, within the context of
transition between conflict and development, national peacebuilding and recovery,
to contribute to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals a nd to the
rights of children and women to survival, development, protection and participation.
24. The programme will contribute to the following outcomes: (a) reduce mortality
of children under five by 25 per cent (from 127 to 95 per one thousand live bir ths);
(b) reduce maternal mortality by 45 per cent (from 543 to 299 per 100,000 live
births); (c) ensure that all children of school-going age (6-11 years) have access to
quality basic education and complete the primary cycle and that at least 20 per cent

7

of children aged 3-5 years are offered early childhood development and school
preparedness programmes; (d) ensure the respect, promotion and protection of the
rights of children; (e) prevent HIV/AIDS among the most vulnerable adolescents
and young people, provide care and support for orphans and other vulnerable
children, and conduct advocacy and mobilize resources for HIV/AIDS;
(f) strengthen national capacities in the area of analysis and development of social
policies, offer social protection services to children and women in the most
vulnerable households and produce strategic information for the management of
development programmes; and (g) offer appropriate preparedness and responses to
emergency situations.
25. In order to support the national Government in the transition between conflict
and development in this recovery phase, the country programme will maintain a
twofold strategy of upstream policy work and strengthened service delivery.
26. Advocacy among parliamentary and government officials to i nfluence national
policies and programmes will help to address the many structural causes of
mortality among children, the low school attendance rates and the existing child
protection issues, including inadequate allocation of budget resources to basic so cial
services and the insufficient application of policies in certain areas. These advocacy
efforts will be enhanced and supported by empirical and scientific evidence.
27. The increase in demand for services and post-emergency rehabilitation of
infrastructures, along with the improvement of the services offered, will contribute
to realizing the rights of millions of children in the crisis -affected areas. The
maintenance of sub-offices will facilitate access to the populations and improve
field interventions.
28. A bottom-up approach to programme design, with the full involvement of
communities, will ensure sustainable solutions to the delivery of goods and services.
Seizing the return to peace as an opportunity, the ‘building back better’ approach
will henceforth constitute a core element of the interventions and will serve as
model for the normative work and programming of UNICEF.
29. Capacity-building will occupy a central place in the strategy of the country
programme. It aims at all stakeholders, notably those caring for children in
households, community workers and leaders, providers of child survival,
HIV/AIDS, as well as education and protection services. The strengthening of
national capacities, in collaboration with partners, will also be part of th e
preparation and response to emergencies. An emergency preparedness and response
plan will be developed and regularly updated to respond to eventual crises.
30. Communication for behaviour change will occupy an important place in the
new programme, placing particular emphasis on the empowerment and mobilization
of the communities to achieve these results. The programme will enhance the
knowledge of stakeholders on essential family practices, using communication
channels accessible to children, parents, community leaders and decision makers.
31. Technical and financial support for monitoring and evaluation will allow staff
to produce information and fill knowledge gaps, as well as support the effective
application of results-based management.
32. The programme places considerable emphasis on the consolidation of
partnerships with national structures, including the private sector, faith -based

8

organizations, communities and NGOs, as well as with bilateral organizations and
United Nations system agencies. These partnerships are indispensable for scaling up
the interventions. UNICEF will contribute to strengthening the rights of Ivorian
children to survival, development and protection by developing these partnerships,
notably with the media, the private sector, national committees and the United
Nations system.
33. Young people represent more than half of the population; their participation is
a key condition to safeguard and nurture the fragile peace processes. Young people
will participate in our programme activities through the involvement of youth
associations, the youth parliament, and peer education activities, among others.
Relation to national priorities and the UNDAF
34. Five UNDAF outcomes have been identified as priorities, based on the draft
PRSP, and will be supported by the programme: (a) the quality of life of the
population is improved; social protection and assistance to vulnerable groups are
strengthened; (b) national and local institutions, as well as civil society, are restored;
good governance is strengthened, serving the entire population while respecting
gender equality and human rights; (c) national capacity building is advanced,
helping the Government and the private sector to create sustainable employment and
ensure food security for the population, notably for the most vulnerable groups;
(d) peace is consolidated, improving the protection of life and property, by
supporting national reconciliation, community reinsertion and respect for human
rights; and (e) water, forestry and environmental resources are protected, preserved
and managed in a sustainable and concerted manner. The UNICEF country
programme contributes to all UNDAF outcomes, although most of the support will
focus on the first outcome on basic social services.
Relation to international priorities
35. The planned programme results will contribute to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and the Plan of Action for ‘A World Fit for
Children’. The programme’s child survival component will contribute to the
achievement of Millennium Development Goals 1, 4, 5, 6 and 7. The results in the
area of education for all are linked to Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3, while
the HIV component of the programme will also contribute to the attainment of
Millennium Development Goal 6. They will support the objectives of the national
strategy, based on the Millennium Development Goals, the plan for the restoration
of the educational system, the national health development plan, and the national
child protection action plan. The programme is also guided by the medium-term
strategic plan 2006-2009.
Programme components
36. The programme comprises five components: (a) the child survival component
includes (i) integrated and continuous care for mothers, newborns and children;
(ii) malnutrition management and emergency obstetric care, PMTCT and paediatric
care; and (iii) water, hygiene and sanitation; (b) the basic education and gender
equality component includes (i) formal education; (ii) non-formal education and
alternative learning opportunities; and (iii) early childhood development and school
preparedness; (c) the child protection component includes (i) support for children

9

in need of special protection; (ii) legal and institutional protection of children; and
(iii) combating gender-based violence and harmful practices; (d) the HIV/AIDS and
adolescents component is structured into three subcomponents: (i) assistance to
orphans and other vulnerable children; (ii) HIV/AIDS prevention among the most
vulnerable adolescents and young people; and (iii) advocacy and resource
mobilization for HIV/AIDS; (e) the cross-cutting social policies, monitoring and
evaluation component comprises the following three subcomponents: (i) social
policies; (ii) planning; and (iii) monitoring and eval uation. A cross-cutting
communication for development component will provide support to the whole
programme, and an emergency response component will be included in all major
programme components.
37. The child survival component will intensify its efforts in support of the
National Health and Development Plan, with a view to scaling up the Child Survival
Strategy. It will contribute to the following national results: (a) provide integrated
packages of high-impact interventions through a continuum of care d uring
pregnancy, childbirth and postnatal care, reaching at least 80 per cent of pregnant
women, newborns and children at the household and community levels and in health
facilities; (b) management of malnutrition, emergency obstetric care, as well as
cases of HIV/AIDS, for 70 per cent of mothers, newborns and children; and
(c) sustainable access to drinking water for 80 per cent of children and women in
rural and near-urban communities, and access to adequate basic sanitation
infrastructures for 75 per cent of children and women in rural and near-urban
communities. This component will apply the following key strategies and
approaches: (a) integration of cost-efficient interventions and continuum of care for
mothers, newborns and children at the community and health facility levels;
(b) communication for behaviour change, particularly at the household and
community levels; (c) advocacy for ownership, resource mobilization and effective
involvement of all stakeholders for the survival of mothers and their chil dren; and
(d) collaboration and enhanced partnerships with the Government on the major
national programmes (health, education, HIV/AIDS, water and sanitation, and
protection), as well as with the decentralized communities, the agencies of the
United Nations system (particularly the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the World Food Programme (WFP) and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), bilateral and multilateral
agencies (including the World Bank, the European Commission and the African
Development Bank), national and international NGOs, and the private sector.
38. The basic education and gender equality component will contribute to the
following results: (a) at least 20 per cent of 3- to 5-year-olds have access to an early
childhood development or school preparedness programme; (b) all 6 - to 11-yearolds, girls and boys, have equal access to quality basic education, and complete the
primary cycle; and (c) all 6- to 15-year-olds, girls and boys, who are outside the
formal system receive quality basic education, particularly in life skills. This
component will carry out advocacy for effective free education and will support the
revision of the construction standards for schools and the modification o f schoolmapping criteria. It will also encourage the equitable allocation of increased
resources for early childhood development and primary education. The child friendly school model will be strengthened. Institutional support will be provided
for an assessment of the integration of life skills into the curricula and the
development of extracurricular activities through clubs (child messengers of peace,

10

HIV/AIDS, health and hygiene). Technical support will also aim to increase the
supply of alternative learning and catch-up opportunities, such as bridging classes,
community schools and the establishment of functional relationships between
non-formal education centres and the formal education system. The programme will
organize outreach activities to mobilize families and communities in support of the
right of the child to education. It will support capacity building of teachers and their
supervisors through training, refresher courses and the provision of supplies. It will
provide technical support for the life skills education of students aged 11-15 at the
junior secondary level. It will support capacity building of institutions at the
decentralized level in the area of resource mobilization, in order to improve access
and retention at the junior secondary level. UNICEF will implement the
Memorandum of Understanding signed with WFP for school canteens and
strengthen the coordination of the education sector group. It will collaborate with
UNFPA on supporting a revision of the curricula with respect to gender and
reproductive health education. The communities, through parent -teacher
associations and NGOs, will participate in social mobilization, rehabilitation of
schools and installation of water and sanitation facilities in schools and preschool
education centres.
39. The child protection component will contribute to the achievement of the
following results: (a) over 58,000 children in need of protection (children living or
working on the streets or outside a family home, disabled children, survivors of
child trafficking or the worst forms of child labour, children in conflict with the law)
are protected; (b) the legislative and institutional frameworks for birth registration,
child labour and juvenile justice are not only in conformity with the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, but also operational; and (c) gender-based violence and
harmful traditional practices are reduced, and all survivors receive adequate care
and support. It will pursue interventions aimed at strengthening community
capacities, mobilization and active participation of the community in all child protection mechanisms. It will provide technical support for the harmonization of
the national legislative framework with international standards. It will develop
information and communication activities to enhance knowledge of the national and
international legal frameworks on child protection. It will ensure greater
involvement of the media for a more sustained promotion of the rights of children
and women. In support of the achievement of result (a) above, the Protection
component and the HIV/AIDS component will adopt an intersectoral approach on
achieving a holistic and integrated national policy protecting orphans and other
vulnerable children. This approach will facilitate the harmonization o f the two
projects and help combat any stigmatization against orphans and other vulnerable
children. Concerning care and support for disabled children, the education
component will support the protection component in areas regarding special
education.
40. The HIV/AIDS component will contribute to the achievement of the
following results: (a) 60 per cent of orphans and children made vulnerable by
HIV/AIDS benefit from protection and assistance; (b) 70 per cent of young people
have access to HIV/AIDS counselling, care and prevention services; and
(c) resources are mobilized and advocacy is conducted for HIV/AIDS, including the
scaling-up of PMTCT and paediatric care and support services. This will involve
providing technical assistance and support to the Ministry of AIDS Control and to
the ministries of health and public hygiene, youth and sports, family and social

11

affairs, and education. The joint United Nations system team will participate in
coordination and resource mobilization activities of the Joint Unit ed Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Finally, several national and international
NGOs will help provide the services offered to beneficiaries.
41. The social policies, monitoring and evaluation component will support the
development and implementation of social policies for children and women. The
component will (a) support the Government in identifying and analyzing funding
gaps with regard to women and children, and in determining the adequate allocation
and of budget funds for the social sectors. It will ensure that the implementation of
the national PRSP and of national policies and international legal instruments (the
Millennium Development Goals, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, A World
Fit for Children) are better monitored. The component will (ii) ensure that children
and women of the most vulnerable households have access to social protection
programmes; (iii) the technical and institutional capacities of the statistics and
research centres of the Ivorian monitoring and evaluation network are strengthened,
to ensure efficient documentation and knowledge management on the situation of
the child; and (iv) an internal performance monitoring mechanism, with qua lity
assurance indicators, will be put in place and made operational at all levels.
42. Communication for development will provide cross-cutting support to the
different components of the programme to enable them to achieve their respective
results through integrated communication activities for large-scale behaviour
change, ownership and sustainability of the programme’s achievements, as well as
for the strengthening of partnerships.
43. Cross-sectoral resources will be used to strengthen the logistical an d
management capacities of the programme as a whole. Emphasis will be placed on
improving the management ability and monitoring capacity of partners within the
context of the implementation, in 2009, of the new approach to harmonized cash
transfers.
44. An emergency response plan is developed in conformity with the Core
Commitments for Children in Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, UNICEF
will be able to provide assistance to 50,000 people in the affected zones, notably
children and women. This plan aims at ensuring (a) real-time access to basic health
care for children and women; (b) malnutrition prevention and case management;
(c) the provision of drinking water and sanitation facilities; (d) HIV/AIDS
prevention among young people and the preventio n and case management of sexual
violence; (e) the protection of children and women against all forms of violence;
and (f) formal and non-formal education for children aged 3 to 15.
Major partnerships
45. The consolidation of peace will accelerate the return of key multilateral and
bilateral partners. The programme will step up its advocacy to ensure support for the
cause of the child; the programme will intensify collaboration with its present
partners, in order to tackle funding and implementation chal lenges within the
recovery context and to consolidate achieved results, notably the Child Survival
Strategy. Within the UNDAF, it will strive to identify, develop and implement joint
projects to promote and protect the rights of children and women. The pro gramme
will further encourage the private sector to help ‘leverage’ resources for children

12

and women. It will intensify its partnerships: (a) with the national parliament to
ensure the increased allocation of resources for basic social services; (b) with c ivil
society and the media to raise awareness and increase the reporting of violations of
the rights of children and women; and (c) with research institutions to strengthen the
analysis of social policies and advance evidence-based decision-making.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
46. The monitoring component of the programme comprises biannual and annual
reviews, control visits to project sites, joint coordination meetings, as well as a
midterm and final review of the programme. The following indicators will be used
to assess progress towards the achievement of the strategic results: infant - and
under-five mortality rates; prevalence of moderate and severe underweight; net
school attendance rates; girls-boys parity in access to education; HIV/AIDS
prevalence among pregnant women; condom use by young people during sexual
intercourse; prevalence of female genital mutilation; birth registration rate; and the
percentage of the budget allocated to the social sectors.
47. The midterm review, which will take place in 2011, will be completed with
evaluations of the community-participation strategy and the gender approach. The
evaluation function will support decision-making and accountability in view of
improving the programme performance and supporting the realization of the rights
of children and women. Research will be carried out to guide community-based
interventions and communication activities for behaviour change.
48. The programme will also participate in the monitoring of progress towards
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by providing support for data
collection activities (multiple indicator cluster survey [MICS], demographic and
health survey, living standards measurement survey and general census), studies and
research projects on various issues affecting children, as well as the current
statistical systems on civil registry, health, education, water and sanitation. The
country programme will support the strengthening of national capacity for data
collection and analysis as well as the dissemination and use of the reports within the
framework of MICS and the development of the DevInfo database.
49. The Ministry of Planning is responsible for the overall coordination of the
programme and the development of synergies between the UNICEF country
programme and the policies and objectives of the Government. The ministries will
have responsibility for implementation of the components within the individual
sectors, and national coordinators will ensure the planning, management and
monitoring of each component of the programme.

13

