Croatia
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Croatia
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.1) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Croatia enjoyed relatively strong economic growth and low inflation from
2000 to mid-2008. The average annual rate of growth in gross domestic product was
over 4 per cent. This helped the country to achieve notable levels of progress, as
measured by social indicators, and to set high expectations for achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, with 31 targets likely to be met. However, the
global economic crisis contributed to negative growth in 2009 and 2010, bringing
increased poverty and unemployment. Fortunately financial assistance to families,
notably child allowances and maternity leave benefits, will remain stable.
Nevertheless, several groups remain vulnerable to the rising level of poverty. Those
most at risk include women, single parents, and households with two or more
children.
2.
About 10 per cent of children under the age of 14 live in poor households, the
most vulnerable among them being Roma. The vulnerability of this group continues
in spite of the participation of Croatia in the intergovernmental initiative Decade of
Roma Inclusion (2005-2015). Despite the fact that Croatia offers good overall social
protection coverage, new policies are needed to strengthen social recovery. The
development, analysis and monitoring of such policies are hampered by inadequate
data disaggregated by sex, age and social groups, and by insuffic ient monitoring of
child poverty.
3.
Negotiations for accession to the European Union (EU), which began in
October 2005, are due to be finalized in 2011. In 2007, as part of the EU accession
process, the Government initiated comprehensive reforms aimed at achieving social
inclusion. Institutional mechanisms for supporting gender equality at central and
local government levels have also been established. However, there has been limited
progress in the area of social inclusion, as children and young people with
developmental difficulties and Roma children are still not sufficiently included in
the educational system.
4.
The consolidated third and fourth periodic reports to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child were due in October 2008, and their submission is expected in
2011. The Concluding Observations of the Committee on the 2004 periodic report
are incorporated into the National Plan of Action 2006 -2012. However, key
recommendations of the Committee still remain a challenge to address. These
include improved data, protection of children from violence, budgeting for children,
and better coordination among sectors.
5.
In 2010 the Government adopted the National Curriculum Framework
covering preschool and primary and secondary education to address the issu e of
quality of education. Despite national efforts to support the development of a
“knowledge society”, performance of Croatian students in reading, mathematics and
science falls below the average of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. Moreover, student performance declined between 2006 and 2009.
6.
Overall preschool enrolment increased from 43 per cent in 2005 to 58 per cent
in 2009. However, access to quality preschool enrolment for the poorest boys and
girls, the Roma children, and children with disabilities remains very limited. One
reason is that kindergartens are still perceived as services for working parents. For
preschool and higher levels of schooling, exclusion and stereotyping are still

2

widespread for children living in poverty and children with disabilities, slowing
down the realization of the right to education for these children. About 97 per cent
of Roma children do not complete elementary school, and only 2 per cent enter
secondary school.
7.
Some progress has been made in advancing the inclusion of socially vulnerable
groups, including children with disabilities. However, promotion of family -oriented
care as an alternative to institutional care has been slow. In 2010, the Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare decided to prevent institutionalization of children
younger than four years of age, demonstrating a clear determination to promote the
child’s right to care by a family. However, progress is not equal, leaving behind
children with disabilities. Out of all children with disabilities placed in the public
care, 76 per cent are placed in institutional care and 24 per cent in non -institutional
forms of residence. Among all children with disabilities in permanent or weekly
public care, 70 per cent are placed in such care because they do not have inclusive
education in their local communities and instead attend “special schools” that
combine both placement and education. Some 30 per cent of children with
disabilities in institutional care are children are without proper p arental care. The
integration of children with developmental difficulties and disabilities in the regular
education system continues to be a challenge. Approximately 2,115 children with
disabilities (aged 5-14, with 40 per cent of them girls and 60 per cent boys) are
referred to special schools because insufficient support is given to education for
such children in the form of access, transport and teaching assistants.
8.
A large number of measures to reduce domestic violence and improve the
status of victims of violence have been systematically implemented. These are based
on the National Strategy for the Protection against Domestic Violence and other
relevant regulations. However, the measures have not resulted in widespread
improvements: the proportion of women who are victims of domestic violence has
not significantly changed over the years, and the proportion of children suffering
from violence in the family increased by 35 per cent from 2005 to 2009.
9.
Significant progress has been made in reducing violence in schools through a
national prevention programme. Nevertheless, in several areas, child protection
from violence, abuse and neglect is hobbled by shortcomings in the judicial and
welfare systems, combined with insufficient coverage and monitoring of programmes
for prevention. Violence in institutions, including sexual exploitation, continues to
occur. Street violence involving the deaths of teenagers (with their peers or young
adults as perpetrators) has increased public attention to the issue of violence.
Between 2000 and 2009, juvenile crime rates for children 14 -17 years of age
increased by more than 34 per cent. The main causes of deaths for children are
accidents, including those that occur in and around the home, and traffic accidents.
10. The national monitoring system on the situation of children is still relatively
underdeveloped, despite a very active role of the Ombudsperson for Children. The
number of cases of infringement of children’s rights reported to the Ombudsperson
is growing annually by 10 per cent. The cases predominantly involve custody rights
and violence against and among children.
11. There is significant progress being made for women and children in Croatia at
institutional, legislative and policy levels. However, the benefits of this progress
have been unequally distributed, and some of the gains have been reversed due to
the economic crisis. Despite the increase in budgetary allocations for the

3

programmes of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the potential for
partnership between the public and NGO sectors for improving the rights of children
is not fully recognized and tapped. A main challenge continues to be the dearth of
disaggregated data and specific indicators to monitor the impact of policies and
reforms and the situation of the most disadvantaged women and children. These
gaps correspond to areas pinpointed in the general measures of implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, issued by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child (CRC/GC/2003/5). UNICEF will support Croatia to address these areas in
the programme of cooperation for 2012-2016.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
12. Significant social change was achieved through the previo us programme of
cooperation. The largest national programme on prevention of violence among
children in schools contributed to an increased knowledge and awareness on
bullying and showcased significant reduction of violence (50 per cent) in the
schools involved. More than 35 per cent of schools are involved in the programme,
endorsing the Government’s Protocol on Procedures in Cases of Violence against
and among Children and Youth.
13. According to official reports, there is clear evidence on increased
identification, documentation, recording and referrals of cases of violence against
children. Due to the National Protocol on Procedures in Cases of Violence against
and among Children and Youth, in the 2006-2010 period, there was a triple increase
in the referral of cases of violence. In the same period, reporting doubled on
violence against children by the Ombudsperson for Children.
14. Young child development was fully supported and embraced thanks to the
extensive national campaign, “The first three years are the most important”. New
community-based services for parents of young children were successfully
introduced, evaluated and scaled up nationally. These included positive -parenting
practices aiming to assure the healthy, safe, stimulating and emotionall y stable
development of young children within their families. The Baby-Friendly Hospital
Initiative contributed to the increased humanization — a more welcoming and
nurturing environment — of maternity wards, the majority of which made progress
and attained the child-friendly status bestowed through the initiative.
15. The number of children without adequate parental care placed in public
institutions has decreased. The data show that the ratio of children without adequate
parental care placed in institutions, compared to children placed in foster care, has
improved (38 per cent: 62 per cent) although still not reaching the Government ’s
goal of 20:80. Parliament adopted the new Law on Foster Care, for the first time
introducing compensation for foster families. The social welfare system has been
reformed, focusing on deinstitutionalization of children and transformation of
residential institutions, as well as on restructuring social services towards an
improved case management system.
16. The country’s knowledge base on children and women was strengthened
through support given to data collection, research and evaluation within the areas of

4

young child development and child protection. The system of independent
monitoring of child rights was enhanced through support to and cooperation with
civil society and the Ombudsperson for Children.
17. The previous programme of cooperation (2007-2011) was designed as a new
UNICEF model, with a view to expanding the country’s ability to promote and
protect rights of children by assisting public and private sectors to address
interrelated issues of disparities, social exclusion and violence against children.
Since regular resources were not allocated to Croatia when the country programme
was prepared, UNICEF successfully transformed its presence through the
mobilization of resources from the private sector within the country, raising a total
of $7.94 million, which has supported implementation of UNICEF -assisted
programmes both in Croatia and in other countries.
18. The capacity of UNICEF to leverage resources has been further strengthened
through integration of public campaigns, fundraising and sales activities, and
through the work of National Ambassadors for UNICEF. Improvement was made to
the visibility of UNICEF, which the public now ranks as the leading organization for
children within Croatia, according to a 2010 national survey. Wide -ranging
partnerships have flourished during the country programme, some of them being of
strategic importance. UNICEF activities have been successful in generating
solidarity among individual donors and volunteers, increasing their willingness to
participate in creating conditions for a protective environment for children.
Lessons learned
19. As was emphasized in the midterm review of the country programme, national
mass media campaigns raising public awareness on selected child rights issues have
been crucial for the development of policy and its successful implementation. These
campaigns are complemented by quick and effective programme implementation,
evidence-based advocacy and partnerships with practitioners, academia and NGOs.
High levels of public support for better standards for children were achieved
through the use of emotionally engaging and innovative communication. Such
communication also has facilitated demand for new services and a building of a
system and network of services responding better to the needs of parents and the
rights of children. Communication campaigns will continue to be essential to policy
development and implementation, and need to be accompanied by effective
programmes, evidenced-based advocacy and partnerships with practitioners,
academics and NGOs. The new programme will also place more emphasis on
partnerships with donors.
20. In the areas of health, social welfare and education, UNICEF-assisted training
and capacity development helped to improve the attitudes of policymakers and
professionals towards being better able to perform according to their accountabilities.
This improvement in attitude and performance has been recognized. The midterm
review emphasized that it made a significant contribution to the implementation of
the National Plan of Action for Children, 2006-2012. However, more efforts are
needed in obtaining reliable, disaggregated data and improving monitoring of
current implementation measures. These activities will be crucial for the
development of policies to reduce poverty and exclusion and for the formulation of
equity-focused interventions.

5

21. The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, with the support of UNICEF,
conducted an analysis of the foster care system in Croatia in 2007 -2008. This
analysis documented the need to improve coordination among all stakeholders
involved in public services and to create policies to benefit children and families in
order to systematically advance the realization of the best interests of the child. In
support of these efforts, the convening role of UNICEF has to be strengthened to
encourage intersectoral cooperation in policy development and planning at the
national and local levels.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
Programme

Other resources
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Alliances for equity and social inclusion of the most vulnerable
children

9 674

Cross-sectoral costs

3 762

Total
Funds raised for UNICEF-assisted programmes in other countries

13 436
1 236

Preparation process
22. The CPD was developed through systematic consultation with governmental
and civil society counterparts and the private sector, as well as key international
partners. In the absence of a United Nations Development Assistance Framework,
the CPD was developed in consultation with United Nations agencies, the World
Bank and the Delegation of the European Union. The CPD is based on t he following
inputs: key results and lessons learned that emerged from the midterm review;
knowledge generated through the Situation Analysis of children and women; and
opinion surveys of children and young persons and of individual donors. These
consultations contributed significantly to the effective positioning of UNICEF and
to clarifying and defining its roles. They also helped to ensure that the programme is
strategic and will complement the goals, initiatives and partnerships of the
Government.
Programme and components results and strategies
23. The overall goal of the 2012-2016 country programme of cooperation is to
support Croatia to advance appropriate legislative, administrative and other
measures for the implementation of the rights recognized in the Convention on
Rights of the Child, especially in accordance with article 4 of the Convention. In
pursuing this goal, the partnership will build alliances in support of child rights and
mobilize society and government around the interrelated issues of disparities, social
exclusion and violence against and among children. The partnership will focus
particularly on: children living in poorest families, especially those with three or
more dependants; Roma boys and girls; children with disabilities; chil dren not
attending preschool; children without parental care, including those living in
institutions; and children experiencing violence.

6

24. The partnership will seek to promote ongoing system reforms driven by
requirements for accession to the EU based on international standards and norms on
child rights. This will be effected by supporting the Government to complete
decentralization of social sector reform and reform of public -care services for
children. Support will also be given to the policymaking pro cess through the
prioritization of child rights issues. Along with these will be efforts to tackle the
interrelated problems of social exclusion, disparities and discrimination in
education, health, justice and social systems.
25. In support of the efforts of the Government and civil society, and in
partnership with the private sector, including media and general public, the country
partnership will contribute to adoption of the general measures of implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The activities pursued through the
partnership will complement ongoing reforms, so that by 2016 two main results will
be achieved. The first result is that national and local authorities ensure that girls
and boys from the poorest families, including those with disabilities or
developmental risks, and those from the Roma minority benefit from (a) inclusive,
community-based preschool services for children and families; (b) family-based
early childhood intervention programmes and services; and (c) perinatal care
services and better parenting education. The second result is that the country
advances the infrastructure for the increased realization of child rights, through
(a) increased prevention and intervention for the protection of children from
violence, abuse and neglect; (b) the planning, budgeting and monitoring of policies
and decisions of national and subnational authorities, which will increasingly
address social exclusion of children; and (c) the increased engagement of public and
private stakeholders in supporting children’s rights.
26. Fundraising activities for other resources (non-core resources) to support
national and international UNICEF-assisted programmes will be developed around
more tangible goals that have clear emotional appeal. Equity will be introduced as a
key theme throughout fundraising appeals, with one goal being to increase and
support committed regular giving by individuals. A main goal will be the steady
growth in the funds raised for regular (core) resources, which is a priori ty for
country office private fundraising. This focus will ensure steady growth of the funds
raised for regular resources, which is a priority of the UNICEF country office
private fundraising framework.
27. The partnership will use a combination of strategies, including advocacy,
social mobilization, knowledge management, child participation, and innovative
interventions focused particularly at the community level, to effectively support the
Government and civil society in achieving social inclusion and equ ity for boys and
girls in the areas of young child development and child protection. It will leverage
national and international expertise and potential for social mobilization by
harnessing the capacities of local communities and the private sector in the creation
of public-private partnerships to reduce disparities and improve social inclusion. To
ensure that national reforms focus on equity, UNICEF will work with partners that
include United Nations agencies and the World Bank.
28. The partnership will contribute to existing national priorities, including the
priorities highlighted by the general public and children themselves in regular
opinion polls. Amplifying community voices and empowering civil society,
community organizations and social networks will further support social inclusion.

7

Continuous support will be provided to the promotion of national and local
networks, convening and engaging relevant stakeholders around prevention of
violence, early childhood interventions, positive parenting practice s and
breastfeeding.
29. The country programme partnership will be actively empowering community
and governmental organizations by increasing awareness and knowledge of key
issues and by fostering positive attitudes and practices among policymakers so tha t
they can make evidence-based decisions in the best interests of children. This will
be done through the combination of public awareness campaigns, innovative models
for behaviour change and engaging policymakers in family- and child-oriented
system change. The strengthening of the national monitoring and evaluation system
with a special focus on disaggregated data will support evidence -based
policymaking, management and accountability. Strengthening the capacities and
increasing the accountability of service providers will also be emphasized.
30. The country programme partnership will drive the generation and sharing of
knowledge and evidence to enable the public and private sectors and civil society to
inform policy and practice and achieve change in the best interests of boys and girls.
Additionally, the specific contribution of the partnership will be to engage leading
national and international experts in the areas of young child development, child
protection and social mobilization.
31. Alliances with media and the private sector will be crucial in promoting
positive behaviours and combating discrimination, and supporting social change for
children. The alliances will equally be crucial in mobilizing private and public
resources for achieving change. The forging and strengthening of such alliances will
serve as a main strategy of the country programme. To leverage resources, the
partnership will rely more extensively on the sustained growth of regular individual
giving and the further development of corporate alliances, building on the results
already achieved in private sector fundraising. To further build alliances for
children, the programme will promote positive business practices benefiting
children and corporate social responsibility focused on support for improving the
lives of children.
32. The participation of children will be central to, and mainstreamed into, the
country programme through the promotion of various platforms through which
young people can express their opinions, such as digital engagement, including
social media. Communication for development will fully support the partnership
goals by promoting attitudes and practices for social change, focused on achieving
results with equity.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
33. The country partnership will support the Government’s development strategies
and plans, particularly the 2006-2013 Strategic Development Framework as it
relates to children, the reduction of poverty, building social cohesion and promoting
corporate social responsibility. It will contribute directly to the priorities of the
National Plan of Action for the Rights and Interests of Children and the Joint
Inclusion Memorandum, in particular in the area of reduction of disparities and
mitigating the impact of the economic crisis on boys and girls. It will also contribute
to the realization of the following government commitments: the National Policy for
the Promotion of Gender Equality; Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion

8

2005-2015; National Population Policy; National Strategy on Equal Opportunities
for Persons with Disabilities; National Strategy for Protection from Domestic
Violence; and National Strategy for Prevention of Behavioural Disorders for
Children and Youth.
Relationship to international priorities
34. The Millennium Development Goals and the priorities of the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013, are integrated into the programme, with a
strong focus on equity, social inclusion, gender equality and child protection and
young child development. The programme of cooperation will support Croatia to
continue to pursue the high standards in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals by enabling excluded and marginalized children to benefit from national
development and economic prosperity. Continued cooperation with the EU will be
further explored, particularly as the Government implements the Joint Inclusion
Memorandum and the EU adopts a new Strategy on Child Rights and the
Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies. Coop eration with the World
Bank will be strengthened in the areas of child poverty and social w elfare.
Programme components
35. Alliances for equity and social inclusion of the most vulnerable children.
Disparities and violence have been identified as major challenges to improving the
situation of children in Croatia. Despite the high level of legal standards for
children, gaps in their implementation still hamper further progress in fulfilling
children’s rights.
36. The Government is pursuing policies for mitigating the impact of the global
economic crisis on the most vulnerable groups and is developing comprehensive
reform of the social welfare system. The programme of cooperation will respond to
the demand of the Government for the development of highly specialized
competencies, and recruitment of staff with such competencies, for addressing
disparities and supporting the protection of the most vulnerable children. Improved
data gathering and analysis are needed to inform policy choices to efficiently
combat exclusion and achieve equity.
37. In the area of young child development (YCD), the rate of preschool
enrolment is still too low (59 per cent), as it is seen primarily as a service for
working parents. The lack of an interdisciplinary approach to comm unity services
for parents and children adds to disparities in child development, especially for
Roma children and children with disabilities.
38. The component aims to accelerate implementation of the social system reform
agenda and effective implementation of laws and policies, particularly at local level.
This, accompanied by the promotion of the gathering and analysis of reliable data
on children, will aim to secure greater investment and action promoting equity,
inclusion and protection for the most vulnerable boys and girls, including children
with disabilities, Roma, children living in poverty, children in the justice system,
children without parental care, and child victims of violence, abuse and neglect.
39. Young child development will be enhanced through support to coherent
multisectoral YCD planning and standard-setting to strengthen access to
community-based services and programmes in health, social welfare, education and

9

support to families. Within YCD, the following results are to be achieved, by the
end of 2016: (a) an increase, by at least 30 per cent, of girls and boys from the
Roma minority and children with disabilities taking part in inclusive early childhood
education in the selected counties; (b) increased quality of, and access to, fam ilybased early childhood intervention programmes and services for children with
disabilities or developmental risks in the selected counties; and (c) improved
quality, accountability and access to post-natal care services, ensuring that they meet
international standards, in order to reach the most vulnerable boys and girls and
support parents to provide adequate care.
40. These results will be achieved by gathering reliable data, and fostering,
integrating and exchanging knowledge through the implementatio n of innovative
and community evidence-based approaches. This will be accomplished in
partnership with civil society organizations, the private sector and local
communities. Emphasis will be placed on stimulating dialogue about the diversity of
needs of those who are excluded or marginalized with regard to their achieving
access to preschool education, and health and social welfare services. Technical
support will be given to the Government to strengthen and scale up affordable
interventions and engage with families and local communities.
41. In addition, the component will focus on system-strengthening and capacity
development through the provision of assistance in improving procedures and
standards; integrating YCD policy elements into the agendas of each sector;
building the capacities of health, education and social welfare professionals; and
reinforcing multi-disciplinary cooperation among sectors in order to achieve a faster
and more effective response to demands for local YCD services, especially for
vulnerable children and their families. Special emphasis will be given to embedding
social norms promoting equity and inclusion through the use of media campaigns
(mass and social media) that promote public awareness and engagement.
42. Within the focus area of child protection from violence, abuse and neglect,
the programme of cooperation will tackle the existing issues of violence and
exclusion. This focus area will support the achievement of the following results:
(a) the rights of girls and boys without appropriate parental care will be enhanced by
improved legislation, social protection mechanisms and special interventions in
areas where there is higher concentration of marginalized children; (b) the ratio of
children who are deprived of parental care living in residential institutions to those
in foster care is improved to 20:80; (c) the ratio of children with disabilities in
residential institutions to those foster care is improved to 60:40; and (d) increased
provision of support services to children victims, witnesses and offenders within the
child protection system.
43. The partnership goals will be achieved through pursuit of a mix of prevention
and intervention strategies. Through the provision of evidence, evaluations and
lessons from innovations, both policy and practice at national and local levels will
be improved in addressing the needs of the most disadvantaged girls and boys.
Through campaigns to promote public awareness and engagement, a positive
environment will be created to support the system change that will effectively
protect children from violence, abuse and neglect. Furthermore, to support the
achievement of the programme component results, the programme will facilitate the
strengthening of coordination between the social and justice sectors, building the

10

capacity of justice, law enforcement and social welfare professionals, and
reinforcing multi-disciplinary cooperation among sectors.
44. The comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system has a strategic role in
informing the policymaking process. To ensure the achievement of the results by
end of 2016, a special focus will be on upgrading the current infrastructure and
building national capacity in monitoring children’s rights, disparities and exclusion.
The improved collection and analysis of reliable data will help to fill data gaps for
adequately monitoring the situation of children and women, as well as for planning,
budgeting and implementing policies. The partnership will in particular contribute
to the dissemination of data, using a communication strategy that will integrate
advocacy and social mobilization to promulgate social change for children.
45. The partnership will support the creation of alliances, with a goal of
channelling investment in children by private and public sectors, raising sufficient
funds for implementation of national programmes, and ensuring adequate
contributions to regular resources and other resources. Furthermore, the partnership
will promote and support child-oriented corporate social responsibility. The
participation of boys and girls and a focus on gender will be mainstreamed
throughout the programme implementation.
Major partnerships
46. Partnerships with governmental institutions, Parliament, counties, cities and
municipalities, civil society, academic institutions, the media and the private sector,
and children will be maintained and strengthened. Major drivers of change will
continue to be the particular strength of the UNICEF presence in Croatia and the
strong partnership with the private sector and mass media.
47. Major national partners will include the Ministries of Family, Veterans Affairs
and Intergenerational Solidarity; Health and Social Welfare; Science, Education and
Sports; Regional and Local Development; Finance; Interior and Ju stice. Major
national partners will also include Government Offices for National Minorities,
Human Rights and Gender Equality; the Education and Teachers Training Agency;
and the Ombudspersons for Children and for People with Disabilities.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. UNICEF will continue to work under the overall coordination of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and European Integration. The implementation of the cooperation
arrangement will be monitored through joint annual meetings, which will include
review of annual achievement, and planning of activities for the following year, as
well as a midterm review of progress in 2014. Baselines will be established in each
area of cooperation. National monitoring systems will provide inf ormation on
progress and results achieved. Evidence on best practices and evaluations will be
used to enhance policy engagement.
49. A Situation Analysis on children and women is being developed and will be
further enriched by the data generated from the 2011 National Census and the
results of the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey in 2014. Additional national and
local surveys will be undertaken as needed in order to provide more in -depth
analysis on key issues.

11

