Democratic Republic of the Congo
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Democratic
Republic of the Congo (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.36) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2012 second
regular session (11-14 September 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 8 February 2013.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female)

35
170 a
24 b
17/27, 29/12
540 c
78/72 d

Primary schoolchildren reaching grade 5 (%)

75 d

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

45 e

Use of improved sanitation services (%)

24 e

HIV prevalence rate among adults (%, 15-49 years, male/female)
Child work (%, 5-14 years)
Birth registration (%, under age of 5)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

..
42
28
28/28, 24/29, 25/27
180

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

63

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

68

† Additional data on women and children can be found at www.childinfo.org/.
a
UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, 2011 Report
b
The underweight estimates are based on World Health Organization Child Growth Standards
adopted in 2006.
c
WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and The World Bank estimates, Trends in maternal mortality: 1990
to 2010. t.
The United Nations Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank)
produces comparable sets of international data on maternal mortality and thereby offsets the
well-documented problem of under-reporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. It
also provides estimates for countries that have no data. Comparable data series for maternal
mortality rates in 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010 can be found at http://www.childinfo.org/
maternal_mortality.html.
d
Data taken from the survey.
e
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, 2012 Report

The situation of children
1.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a population of 71 million people
spread over 2.34 million square kilometres. Seventy per cent of the population l ives
in rural areas. Annual population growth is 3.1 per cent. After a decade of violent
armed conflicts, political tensions have subsided and, following elections in 2006
and 2011, institutions have been put in place. The security situation has gradually
improved, despite ongoing pockets of instability in the eastern part of the country
associated with the presence of armed groups. In that area, at end -2011, there were
still over 1.7 million displaced persons in that region. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission (MONUSCO) is still deployed there (20,000
international military, police and civilian personnel). National income per capita is
$180 and more than 70 per cent of the population lives below the poverty line.

2

2.
Despite the challenges and the fact that in 2011 the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was on the bottom rung of the 187-country Human Development Index,
some progress is evident. Indeed, between 2000 and 2010, child mortality and
maternal mortality rates declined from 213 to 170 deaths per 1,000 live births and
from 770 to 540 per 100,000 live births, respectively. Immunization against DPT3
increased from 30 per cent (2001) to 63 per cent (2010) and primary school
enrolment rose from 61 per cent (2007) to 75 per cent (2010). Neve rtheless, none of
the Millennium Development Goals will be met in 2015. Although humanitarian
action helped reduce severe acute malnutrition from 16 per cent (2001) to 11 per
cent (2010), 43 per cent of children continue to suffer from chronic malnutrition , a
situation that has not changed since 2001. The fight against HIV/AIDS has
stagnated: only 15 per cent of women aged 15-24 know how it is transmitted and
only 4 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women have received treatment to prevent
mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT). 1 The share of the population with access to
drinking water or sanitation has not increased and birth registration has declined,
from 34 per cent (2001) to 28% (2010), with substantial differences among
provinces.
3.
The main causes of under-five mortality are still malaria, acute respiratory
infections, diarrhoeal diseases and malnutrition. Despite low public investment,
social services continue to be in strong demand among the population and certain
related indicators are astonishingly high. For example, 74 per cent of birth deliveries
are assisted by qualified personnel. That is mainly thanks to an historic partnership
between civil society and the State, whereby the latter hires the former to provide
health and education services. The absence of government investment and the
fragmentation of public assistance have eroded the capacity of civil society and of
functional public facilities to maintain quality services. The re -emergence and
expansion of certain epidemics (polio, measles and cholera) are proof of that. In
addition, little has been done to modernize infrastructure. Essential supply systems,
such as the cold chain, have not been put in place. Such basic facilities as school
desks are lacking.
4.
Despite the high demand for services, they are costly and access to them is
highly unequal. Governance, management and coordination problems plague the
system at the national, provincial and local levels, thereby undermining political
commitment, planning, budgetary expenditure, coordina tion and alignment of
partnerships, the accountability and transparency of service providers, and the
participation of the population in management of the services. Combined with
extreme poverty, these factors create financial barriers hampering families’ access to
nutrition and services and weaken the social standards that are essential for keeping
families together and maintaining a protective environment for children. Indeed, the
Congolese population contributes 42 per cent of the financing for health ca re
services. 2 The poorest people are forced to resort to less costly alternatives,
__________________
1

2

Children and AIDS: Fifth Stocktaking Report, 2010 (UNICEF, UNAIDS, WHO, UNFPA,
UNESCO).
Despite the Government’s efforts, financing of the health system of the Democr atic Republic of
the Congo in 2008 and 2009 was essentially provided by households (43% in 2008, 42% in
2009), international cooperation and NGOs (34% in 2008, 36% in 2009), public funds (15% in
2008, 12% in 2009) and enterprises (8% in 2008, 10% in 2009). Health Systems 20/20 Project.
May 2011. National health accounts 2008-2009. Bethesda, MD: Health Systems 20/20 project,
Abt Associates Inc.

3

sometimes to the detriment of their health and of their children’s development. (such
as: traditional healers, witchcraft and fasting).
5.
Equity analysis shows that most of the children are deprived and vulnerable:
only the children in the richest quintile are better off. Gender issues and
discrimination against highly vulnerable populations, such as persons with
disabilities, indigenous groups, children affected by HIV, chi ld workers, and those
who live in the streets exacerbate the deprivation of rights. With respect to gender,
while equality between men and women has been accomplished in law, it has yet to
be practised. Moreover, little appears to be known about the differ ent ways gender
issues affect girls and boys in the course of their life cycle. The indicators available
show that, with respect to education, girls are disadvantaged, while boys are
disadvantaged when it comes to nutrition.
6.
Even though the war has ended, armed conflicts and acts of violence
perpetrated by militia persist in the eastern part of the country, where children, girls
in particular, continue to be exposed to rape, ill-treatment and exploitation. Despite
that environment, social indicators are not worse than elsewhere, mainly due to
humanitarian action and mining resources. In contrast, the provinces in the centre of
the country are especially vulnerable because of a lack of investment and a dearth of
easily exploitable resources: their social indicators are worse than those of the
eastern provinces and of the capital. The indicators for Kinshasa are better than the
national average, but mask considerable disparities within that vast agglomeration
of 10 million inhabitants.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results
7.
In 2008 to 2012, the programme continued its three-fold focus on emergency
situations, transition and development.
8.
Under the Humanitarian Action Plan, UNICEF and its partners (domes tic and
international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the Government of Japan, the
United States Agency for International Development/ Office of Foreign Disaster
Assistance (USAID/OFDA), and British, Spanish, Swedish, Canadian and
European cooperation agencies) provided assistance to 4.8 million people thanks to
the Rapid Response to Movements of Population. (RRMP) mechanism with respect
to non-food items (NFI), shelter, water, hygiene and sanitation (emergency relief
and humanitarian action — EHA) and education. UNICEF contributed to
implementation of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy
through the Programme of Expanded Assistance to Returnees in the stabilized zones
(PEAR+), which reached 321, 248 people. The Organization co ordinated emergency
response in four areas (nutrition, education, EHA and NFI) and in the “Child
Protection” working group. In addition, 258,946 children associated with the armed
forces and armed groups, unaccompanied children, or child victims of conflic ts,
including 130,204 girls, received appropriate assistance. Care was also provided for
74,554 survivors of sexual abuse, including 27,211 children.
9.
In support of the National Health Development Plan (PNDS), and in
partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO), the Global Alliance for

4

Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI), the World Bank (WB), the Government of
Japan, British, Swedish and American cooperation agencies and the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, UNICEF strengthened routine immunization a nd conducted
accelerated immunization activities. DPT3 immunization coverage improved
significantly. In the course of additional activities, 18,131,073 children vaccinated
against measles. In addition to the routine immunization of 8,487,029 children,
more than 15 million received three doses of oral polio vaccine. Eight campaigns
conducted in partnership with the Helen Keller International NGO and the Canadian
International Development Agency (CIDA) resulted in the de -worming with
mebendazole of 90 per cent of children aged 12 to 59 months. In addition, 90 per
cent of those aged from 6 to 59 months received vitamin A supplementation. In
partnership with the WB, the International Drug Purchase Facility (IDPF) and the
United States President’s Malaria Initiative, approximately 40 per cent of children
were protected against malaria thanks, especially, to campaigns distributing
9,712,072 long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets (LLINs). Enrolment
campaigns conducted in partnership with Dutch and Japanese cooperation agencies
resulted in the enrolment of 4,676,436 children in the first year of primary school.
Furthermore, 5 151 136 children received school kits and 25,406 primary school
teachers received training and teaching materials.
10. Community-based programmes yielded important results. Thanks to the
national “Healthy Village” programme, implemented in partnership with American,
British and Japanese cooperation agencies, 1,230,500 people gained access to saf e
drinking water and 1,117,945 to sanitation. Under the “Healthy School” programme,
201,987 pupils had access to safe drinking water and 161,571 to sanitation. The
Nutrition Programme, in partnership with the European Union, the Pooled Fund for
Humanitarian Assistance), the Department for International Development, and the
Danish Committee for UNICEF helped increase the number of severely
undernourished children receiving community care from 45, 652 in 2007 to 157,000
in 2011. Child protection systems helped 991 822 vulnerable children, of whom
469,901 were girls.
11. In collaboration with UNFPA, WFP and USAID, UNICEF supported the
National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies’ 2010 Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey, the findings of which were incorporated in the Poverty Reduction
and Growth Strategy Paper (PRGSP-II) and in the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF).That Survey provided the government with
reliable data for monitoring progress toward the Millennium Development Goals.
However, greater use should be made of the Survey data for gender and equity
analysis.
Lessons learned
12. Experience has shown the effectiveness of child health campaigns and Child
Health Days. Indeed, the large-scale campaigns against epidemics (polio, measles,
the distribution of LLINs), combined with vitamin A supplementation and de worming, and school enrolment and birth registration campaigns, have managed to
reach large numbers of children. However, vertical approaches undermine the
capacity of decentralized teams to implement integrated services. It is therefore
essential to boost those capacities at the peripheral level. The new programme
should support the provision of integrated packages of services through advanced
strategies and campaigns aimed at revitalizing systems from the bottom up. It will

5

be necessary to strengthen partnership with civil society and faith -based
organizations in order to provide curative, promotional, and preventive services,
update health and education zone management models and build line management
and supervisory capacity.
13. The strengthening of service delivery needs to be accompanied by support for
communication for development so as to maintain a high level of acceptance and
demand for services, and by the adoption of essential family practices. The “Healthy
Village” approach and community-based actions to improve nutrition have built a
bridge between services and families, thereby restoring the credibility of the State
and contributing to peace-building. These approaches enhance social cohesion and
communities’ resilience to crises, as the evaluation of PEAR+ showed.
14. Another lesson learned is the need to promote an environment conducive to
respect for children’s rights. Given the dearth of investment in th e social sectors,
analytical and monitoring efforts that take gender and equity dimensions into
account are more likely to prompt the development of “investment plans” and
advocacy at every level for increased public investment. Half -yearly monitoring of
progress made with removing barriers to access to and the use of services makes it
possible to verify and adjust the solutions applied.
15. Poverty reduction requires more rational and equitable use of the considerable
contribution that populations make to social services. Supporting communities’ selfassessment and search for solutions to the problems of the most vulnerable
strengthens their participation and the demand for quality services. However, that is
not enough. The provision of services has to be accompanied has to be accompanied
by social protection mechanisms. Advocacy with opinion shapers, especially in
connection with the promotion of family practices, has proved to be a useful
contribution to efforts to develop child-friendly social standards.
16. In this precarious and volatile context, experience has highlighted the need for
capacity-building at every level in order to cope with humanitarian crises. Today,
such capacity is lacking. In the eastern part of the country, such capacity -building
needs to go hand in hand with stabilization, the restoration of the State’s credibility
and the establishment of peaceful conflict resolution mechanisms. In the central and
western parts of the country, capacity-building is needed to support peacebuilding
and strengthen community ties and social services.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

151 730

247 000

398 730

Quality basic education for all children

46 000

52 000

98 000

Governance for child protection

24 000

32 000

56 000

An environment conducive to children’s rights

23 000

20 500

43 500

Emergency preparedness and transition

10 000

18 500

28 500

Intersectoral

20 000

20 000

40 000

Child survival

6

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Total

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

274 730

390 000

664 730

Since the Democratic Republic of the Congo experiences major humanitarian crises,
UNICEF will continue to mobilise ORE (Other Resources — Emergency) estimated to total
$250,000,000.

Preparation process
17. The PRGSP-II was validated in November 2011 and the Government’s 2012 2016 Programme of Action in May 2012. On that basis and in collaboration with the
Government, the United Nations System (UNS) has strengthened the UNDAF. The
UNICEF programme draws on that Framework and will contribute to the
achievement of national outcomes. It will participate in the implementation of the
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy in order to support the
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed Conflict, as
well as the Peace Consolidation Programme (PCP).
18. The situation was analyzed in 2012, taking into account equity issues and
hurdles impeding the exercise of children’s rights. Simultaneously, in order to take
stock of the situation and peculiarities of each province, the provincial committees
for coordinating and monitoring the programme organized workshops run according
to consolidated guidelines. In consultation with the Government, the United Nations
system, civil society and other partners, the programme was validated on 4 June
2012 under the aegis of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Francophonie.
Programme components, results and strategies
19. The aim of the programme is to ensure that each child in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is born into and grows up in an environment conducive to the
exercise of her or his rights. Five programme component results (PCR) will
contribute to that goal. A coordinated and convergent approach will aim to achieve
more equitable distribution of progress.
20. Child survival, quality basic education for all children, and governance
for child protection. These three components are structuring the whole programme
and will aim to support sectoral policies and their implementation at the
intermediate and peripheral levels. They will support the delivery of integrated
packages of quality services through advanced strategies and campaigns aimed at
revitalizing the system from the bottom up. They will strengthen partnership with
civil society and faith-based organizations. They will support curative, promotional,
and preventive services, as well as the updating of decentralized management
models. They will consolidate line management and supervisory capacity. More
robust service delivery will be accompanied by support for communication for
development geared to the adoption of family practices and the maintenance of a
high level of acceptance and demand for services.
21. An environment conducive to children’s rights. This component will
support the above three components via cross-cutting analysis of the hurdles
impeding quality services, as well as regular monitoring and evaluation of
improvements in equity, including gender equity, implemented by decentralized

7

management teams. Budgetary analyses will encourage the development of
“investment plans” with a view to strengthening advocacy at the national, provincial
and local levels in favour of increased investment in services. That advocacy will
target opinion-shapers, so that they contribute to the adoption of child -friendly and
protective social norms. This component will boost accountability and the rational
use of resources, through social protection approaches and other mechanisms. It will
support communities’ ability to assess their own progress and to seek modern and
innovative solutions. It will, in addition, strengthen community participation and the
demand for quality services and child protection.
22. Emergency preparedness and transition. This component will support the
development of national, provincial and local capacity to prepare for and respond to
humanitarian crises and it will contribute to the stabilization and consolidation of
peace.
23. Strengthening partnerships is a key cross-cutting strategy in the programme.
UNICEF will be primarily responsible for this and coordinate government activity at
the national and provincial level. The sheer scope of the challenges demands tight
coordination and coherence among United Nations system agencies and the
technical and financial partners (TFPs) and the private sector with respect to
implementing the programmes and engaging in political advocacy, while taking
comparative advantages into account and ensuring optimal use of resources to
achieve targeted outcomes. UNICEF will support joint strategies and programming.
In reaching cooperation agreements with domestic civil society, the programme is
looking for in-depth ownership and the long-term sustainability of the results
achieved. International NGOs will be allies in capacity-building and in passing on
skills to domestic civil society and decentralized agencies. The programme will
induce increased cooperation with members of parliament, the media , research
institutes and universities in order to strengthen analysis of social policies, as well
as the documentation and dissemination of best practices.
Child survival
Programme Component Result (PCR)-1: By end-2017, the percentage of children
and their families benefiting from high-quality curative, preventive and promotional
interventions with a major impact on health, including PMTCT, nutrition and EHA
will have increased significantly and in an equitable and sustainable manner,
especially in the Health Zones (HZ) and in communities.
24. Making full use of synergies, the component will support health, HIV, nutrition
and EHA interventions. It will take its cue from the National Health Development
Plan (PNDS) and work closely with partners to improv e the provision of and access
to quality services in 207 development HZ. There will be a special focus on
innovation, the introduction of modern management skills and capacity-building
with a view to equitable implementation of effective sets of interventi ons. Thus, this
component will support demonstration initiatives and the scaling -up of the lessons
they teach. In the other 308 HZ, including those in a state of emergency, the
component will support the provision of a minimum package of high -impact
interventions in health, nutrition and EHA, giving priority to mass campaigns and
the organization of periodic special events.
25. Alongside the above, preventive and promotional activities will be undertaken
at the community level with an emphasis on empowerin g the population. In the EHA

8

area, the component will support the scaling-up of the national “Healthy
Village/Healthy School” strategy. The approach is geared to communities’ demand
for services and to simple, low-cost technologies adapted to local needs. Efforts to
combat malnutrition will focus in particular on the central -western part of the
country.
26. In collaboration with partners and the United Nations system, this component
will strengthen coordination, consistency, and advocacy for better governme nt
investments and improved governance. Under the Government’s leadership, the
component will consider partnering with international and domestic NGOs, civil
society, the TFPs (European Union/ The European Community Humanitarian Office
[ECHO], the Department for International Development, USAID, Japan, the African
Development Bank (AfDB), WB, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), CIDA, Korea
International Cooperation Agency, etc.) and the private sector.
Quality basic education for all children
PCR-2: by end-2017, children will have been assured of universal access and there
will have been a significant and equitable increase in the number of children
completing a quality basic education, within a life-cycle approach.
27. This component will be in line with the Intermediary Education Plan (PIE)
and will contribute to the reform currently under way. In particular, it will support
the development of integration and remedial education strategie s for vulnerable
children, with a view to avoiding exclusion, repetition of grades and dropping out,
and fostering educational achievement. It will develop social protection measures in
order to overcome financial barriers. Special attention will be paid t o children’s
transition from family to school, by educating the parents and improving the
welcome given to children in their first year at school. This component will
contribute to the provision of school books and, by mobilizing additional resources,
to the construction of local schools closer to communities. Synergies will be
developed between this component, nutrition and EHA.
28. It will help to enhance the quality of education by developing and
implementing national standards and by raising schoolchildren’s reading and math
skills, as well as everyday skills. It will train supervisors and teachers and
strengthen the system for monitoring student performance. In transition situations,
this component will support education for peace and seek to restore ca pacity in
destabilized establishments. Capacity-building among parents will seek to enable
them to participate more effectively in monitoring the learning process, demanding
accountability, and insisting that budgets are implemented.
29. Together with the partners, UNICEF will support advocacy aimed at eliciting
sound government investments in education. The Organization will support
coordination among the partners and consistency with the PIE. Under the
Government’s leadership, the component will consider partnering with international
and domestic NGOs, civil society, the TFPs (Belgian, Spanish, French, British and
American cooperation agencies, the Japanese Government, WB and AfDB), the
United Nations system and Global Partnership for Education.
Governance for child protection

9

PCR-3: by end-2017, prevention and protection against all forms of violence, child
abuse, and exploitation, as well as access to civil registry services and legal
protection will have been significantly and equitably strengthened.
30. This component fits in with the approaches taken in the law on child protection
and national action plans and sectoral strategies. It will target four priority areas of
action: justice for children, birth registration, protection against exploitation and
violence, especially sexual and gender-based violence, and the enlisting of children
in armed groups (cf. the mandate assigned by the United Nations Security Council).
31. The strategies will be geared to birth registration campaigns and promoting
access to judicial and legal services. This component will help protect children’s
rights by reinforcing the safety networks for vulnerable children (victims of
violence, exploitation, child abuse, neglect, stigmatization), by ensuring access to
services for child victims of, or affected by, armed conflicts, and by promoting
positive social standards. It will support capacity building for planning, following
up on and coordinating interventions, including surveillance, monitoring, and
reporting of all forms of violence, child abuse and exploitation.
32. Under the Government’s leadership, this component will be coordinated and
implemented in cooperation with international and domestic NGOs, civil society,
the private sector, as well as with MONUSCO and the Unite d Nations system.
An environment conducive to respect for children’s rights
PCR-4: by end-2017, laws, social policies, planning, budgets, expenditure, public
opinion and social standards will have been shaped by continuous analysis,
monitoring and evaluation of children’s circumstances, and will foster an
environment in which children’s rights are cherished and protected.
33. Thanks to alliances and partnerships, this component will boost support for
legislative reform and the development and modernization of sectoral policies. It
will support the establishment of effective mechanisms for managing and
coordinating programs and partnerships at the national and decentralized levels with
stakeholder participation. Data collection and more robust, ongoing analysis of the
situation will be directed toward advocating solid investment in the social and
protective services and rational budgeting. Analysis of the factors hampering
services and regular monitoring of advances in equity by decentralized management
teams will strengthen accountability on the periphery. By empowering communities
by raising their self-evaluation capacity and ability to seek solutions that are
sensitive to gender issues and the problems of the most vulnerable, this component
will raise the demand for quality services. Evaluation, documentation and
operational research will underpin effectiveness, innovation and modernization in
the approaches taken. Advocacy will target the media and opinion -shapers so that
they, too, throw their weight behind the adoption of child-friendly and protective
social norms.
34. Under the Government’s leadership, this component will be coordinated and
implemented with the United Nations system, international and domestic NGOs, the
private sector, the universities, faith-based organizations and the media.
Emergency preparedness and transition

10

PCR-5: by end-2017, the most vulnerable children and their families hit by crises
will have received timely and effective assistance; those in a post -crisis environment
will have benefited from improved and equitable access to social services and
peaceful conflict resolution.
35. This component will strengthen the capacities of decentralized educational and
health authorities, of international and domestic NGOs a nd of civil society with
respect to preparedness, prevention and management of crises, epidemics, and
natural catastrophes. It will support the development of an emergency preparedness
policy and plans in high-risk territories. It will make it possible for resources
mobilized in order to overcome humanitarian crises to rely on the capacities and
resilience of communities to increase both their impact and their sustainability.
36. In order to contribute to the stabilization and consolidation of peace in pos tcrisis situation areas, this component will scale up multisectoral interventions aimed
at improving access to services, by adopting an analytical approach to conflict
management. Within the framework of the International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy, it will help support the Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for
Areas Emerging from Armed Conflict and the PCP.
37. In cooperation with the Government and in partnership with the NGOs and the
TFPs, sectoral groups will strengthen coordination of the activities undertaken. In
the transition component, interventions will draw on the United Nations system’s
joint programme.
38. Intersectoral. The costs of this component are geared to ensuring the
availability of the human, financial, and material resources needed for logistical
support and the supplies required for the programme. These resources will enable
field offices to provide key support for the optimal implementation and monitoring
of the programme at the decentralized level.
Links to national priorities and the UNDAF
39. The programme corresponds mainly to the third pillar of the PRGSP -II:
improving access to social services and strengthening human capital. It contributes
to achievement of the outcomes sought by the PNDS, the National Hygiene
Operational Plan, the PIE, the National Plan of Action for Orphans and Vulnerable
Children and the National Strategy Against Gender-Based Violence. It is line with
achievement of three of the six effects sought by the UNDAF — social services,
governance and stabilization. In the ISSSS framework, component 5 helps support
the Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed Conflict
and the Peace Consolidation Programme.
Links with international priorities
40. Focused on equity, the programme takes its inspiration from the Millennium
Declaration/Millennium Development Goals and from UNICEF’s 2006 -2013
Medium-Term Strategic Plan. It will contribute to the fulfilment of women’s and
children’s rights established in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It is
inspired by the conclusions of the Committee on the Rights of the Child concerning
improvement and application of the legal framework, increas ed expenditure on
behalf of the social sectors, the sensitization and training of the population in human

11

rights, education for peace and strengthening of the system for protecting children
from abuse, exploitation and discrimination. It is line with the B usan Principles, in
respect of which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a pilot country.
Partnerships
41. UNICEF will continue to play an active part in existing partnerships and will
strengthen its advocacy and its strategic alliances with its partners (Canada/CIDA,
Sweden/SIDA, Japan/Japanese Agency for international cooperation, the United
States of America/USAID/“Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance”/“United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention”/the United States President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the President’s Malaria Initiative, Great
Britain/Department for International Development, Republic of Korea/Korea
International Cooperation Agency, Belgium, Spain, France, European Union/ECHO,
GAVI, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria; WB, AfDB, the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and UNICEF’s national committees).
42. Under UNDAF and the United Nations Transition Framework, UNICEF will
support certain joint programmes, particularly the H4+ 3 initiatives and strategies to
fight HIV/AIDS, nutritional security, social protection, population censuses, and the
stabilization and consolidation of peace. In addition, cooperation with members of
parliament, the media, NGOs and faith-based organizations will be stepped up.
Monitoring, evaluation and management
43. Under the Government’s leadership, monitoring will include semi -annual and
annual reviews, on-site supervisory and verification visits, joint meetings for
coordination purposes and a midterm review under the aegis of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and Francophonie. Capacity -building in
respect of risk management will continue with the United Nations system,
particularly in connection with the harmonized approach to cash transfe rs.
44. In order to strengthen monitoring and evaluation of progress in respect of
equity, four levels will be considered: (a) analysis of the status of children’s rights
and of the obstacles hampering the exercise of those rights; (b) under UNDAF,
verification of UNICEF’s contribution to national outcomes, especially through an
approach using third parties; (c) support for monitoring national programmes
allowing for real time access to results and adjustments to their implementation;
(d) surveys and impact assessments (Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, health
surveys and censuses).

__________________
3

12

Joint initiative of the WB, WHO, UNAIDS, the United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF
aimed at expediting achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in health.

