Republic of Djibouti
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for the Republic of
Djibouti (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.9) was presented to the Executive Board
for discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2006)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (%, net, male/female, 2006)

0.4
91
23 a
18/27, ..
300 b
67/66 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

92 c

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

88

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

50

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

2.5

Child work (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2006)
(% male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

8
89
91/88, 90/82, ..
1 210

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

88

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

85

†

a

b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
http://www.childinfo.org/.
The underweight estimates are based on the World Health Organization Child Growth
Standards, adopted in 2006.
The official estimate is 550 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births and is taken from the
2002 Djibouti survey on family health. The Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter -agency
Group (the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts) provides data that are broadly comparable and adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
With a population of 818 000 inhabitants according to the 2009 census and
sustained economic growth (5 per cent per year on average since 2006), the
Republic of Djibouti is a middle-income country (gross national income (GNI) per
capita of $1,280 in 2010). Seven out of 10 inhabitants live in urban areas and six out
of 10 in the city of Djibouti. Economic activity is largely dominated by the tertiary
sector (77 per cent); the primary and secondary sectors account for only 4 and
19 per cent of GNI, respectively. The persistent drought has led to a drastic
reduction in the income sources of herders and rural dwellers, a situation that is
exacerbated by the 2011 humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa. Although
significant progress has been made with regard to the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) on gender parity in and universal access to primary education, the
Republic of Djibouti must invest more and mobilize the comm itment of its national
and international partners in order to achieve the other MDGs by 2015.

2

2.
The under-five morality rate dropped from 123 deaths per 1,000 live births in
1990 to 91 per 1,000 in 2010, but this improvement is still insufficient to meet the
target of 41 per 1,000 in 2015. Efforts to improve the child survival and
development rates face nutritional challenges since 23 per cent of children under
five are underweight. The maternal mortality rate is very high; there are currently
300 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. This is slow progress as the indicator
was estimated at 370 per 100,000 in 1990. Pregnancy -related complications, disease
and malnutrition are major underlying factors that affect women’s and children’s
health in Djibouti. They are compounded by persistent socio-cultural behaviour
(such as not using colostrum and introducing nutritional supplements too late or too
early), unavailability of food owing to food insecurity, low household low income
and the organization and capacity of the health system itself, which often does not
meet the needs of the population. Nine out of 10 people now have access to drinking
water, but only 50 per cent of the population has the use of improved sanitation
facilities. Poor access to water, hygiene and sanitation causes infectious diseases
that cannot be treated properly because of staff shortages, inadequate services and
referral systems and ignorance of danger signs during pregnancy.
3.
Djibouti is facing a widespread AIDS epidemic; the prevalence rate is 2.5 per
cent for adults. The HIV epidemic in the country is characterized by significant
discrepancies; it is heavily concentrated in urban areas (particularly in the city of
Djibouti), among women (who account for 56 per cent of those livin g with the
virus) and young people (more than one in 10 of those living with HIV are aged 15
to 24). Only 40 per cent of people living with HIV have access to antiretroviral
drugs and only 3 per cent of pregnant women follow a comprehensive prophylaxis
programme to prevent mother-to-child transmission of the virus. Prevention
activities aimed at young people are still piecemeal; their knowledge of how the
virus is transmitted and prevented is limited and condom use is rare among them.
The situation of young people outside the school system is of particular concern
because they lack “life skills”, there is no well-developed civil society group that
focuses on destigmatizing HIV and encouraging young people, and especially girls,
to say “no” to early marriage.
4.
Although Djibouti is on track to eliminate gender disparity in primary
education by 2015, one of every four children is not enrolled in school. 1 This is
largely a result of low enrolment rates among the poorest inhabitants of rural areas,
particularly nomads. Of the children who are enrolled, the repetition rate for the
final year of primary education remains high (23 per cent). Girls still represent a
minority of first-year enrolments in basic education (45 per cent). One of the main
barriers to access to education is still the high cost of school books, which leads
families to spend more on boys than on girls.
5.
The Government of Djibouti has ratified all the international treaties on the
rights of children and women (the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women).
Various child protection measures, laws and codes have been adopted by the
Government, but not all of them are being implemented. For example, there is a law
that prohibits the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) and provides for the
punishment of offenders but FGM is still practiced, particularly in rural areas. The
__________________
1

According to the Ministry of Education’s Statistical Yearbook, the enrolment rate in primary
education is 75 per cent.

3

registration of children at birth is not yet systematic. Although the Penal Code
prohibits violence against children, there is no specific law that prohibits such
violence or that guarantees protection against corporal and other forms of
punishment.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
6.
The UNICEF programme of cooperation with the Government of Djibouti has
led to significant progress in child survival. The implementation of large -scale,
community-based programmes has combated malnutrition effectively. In 2011,
23,124 (75 per cent) of 31,006 children suffering from malnutrition were diagnosed
and treated. An effective national network of grandmothers led to a significant
increase in the exclusive breastfeeding rate, which rose from 1 per cent in 2007 to
25 per cent in 2011. The Government has promulgated implementing legislation for
the Code of Marketing for Breastmilk Substitutes in order to promote breastfeeding.
Djibouti has had no recorded cases of polio since 1999 thanks to continued UNICEF
support for the Ministry of Health through the National Immunization Days,
creation of a mobile team for problem areas in the interior of the country and
strengthening of the nationwide epidemiological monitoring system. Consequently,
the percentage of children under one year of age who are vaccinated against
diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT3 vaccine) has risen from 56 per cent in 2006
to 88 per cent in 2010. UNICEF advocacy helped to secure Global Alliance for
Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) financial and technical support for the
introduction of new vaccines to prevent rotavirus and pneumonia in children.
7.
With regard to child protection, UNICEF technical support for the Government
led to the promulgation of a law on sexual assault and female genital mutilation in
2009 and, in 2010, to adoption of the Juvenile Justice Act, appointment of a juvenile
court judge and development of the National Plan of Action for Children in
Djibouti. In 2007, the Ministry of Youth, Sport and Recreation, with the support of
UNICEF, established a national policy on youth, sport and recreation for the decade
2008-2017 and developed a five-year action plan for the period 2008-2012, which
was renewed for the period 2013-2015.
Lessons learned
8.
The two strategies underpinning the key achievements of the cooperation
programme with the Government of Djibouti during the 2008 -2012 cycle were:
(a) advocacy for legislative progress in the area of child survival and protection;
and (b) capacity-building for stakeholders in all programme areas, particularly
community-based approaches. The next programme will continue to focus on these
strategies while relying on a more detailed analysis of the situation of children in
terms of geographic, socioeconomic and gender disparities.
9.
The significant legislative reforms adopted continue to have a limited effect on
the lives of the population because of inconsistent implementation. Particular effort
should be devoted to building the capacity of those in a position of responsibility to
be aware of the laws adopted and to implement them. Implementation of the
National Plan of Action for Children in Djibouti has been delayed considerably; it

4

could have led to significant progress in scaling up high -impact interventions at the
national and community levels.
10. Like other countries in the Horn of Africa, Djibouti is facing a chronic drought
that threatens the survival of the population, especially the most vulnerable. In light
of the relationship between the country’s vulnerability to drought and rising food
prices and the combined effect of these two factors on children’s lives, the country
programme will continue to advocate a holistic approach to combating malnutrition
with the participation of all stakeholders. Drought is a recurrent phenomenon in
Djibouti and people must learn to take charge of their own lives. The 2013-2017
cooperation programme should promote a natural disaster risk reduction approach in
order to help vulnerable peoples become more resilient.
11. The water supply programme for rural schools has led noma dic peoples to
settle near these institutions and facilitated the education of their children.

Country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 350

8 650

10 000

Quality education for all

800

5 550

6 350

Children, young people and HIV/AIDS

375

2 550

2 925

Child survival and development

Child protection

225

2 050

2 275

Cross-sectoral

1 000

700

1 700

Total

3 750

19 500

23 250

Preparation process
12. This country programme is the outcome of a long participatory process that
began with consideration of the common country assessment carried out during
preparation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF),
in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
and with the effective participation of the sectoral ministries, civil society, the
private sector, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and development partners.
The strategic planning workshop held on 30 November and 1 December 2011 led to
formulation of the UNDAF. The UNICEF country programme is guided by the
UNDAF, but it also takes into account the primary recommendations of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the first and
second reports [of Djibouti]. This document was approved by the country’s partners
and by the representatives of bilateral and multilateral cooperation and of the United
Nations system at the workshop held on 12 January 2012.
Programme component results and strategies
13. The cooperation programme for the period 2013-2017 aims to contribute to
effective enjoyment of the right of Djiboutian children, adolescents and women to

5

survival, development, protection and participation. The programme will thus
contribute to achievement of the national objectives set out in the National Initiative
for Social Development, including the MDGs. UNICEF will support the efforts of
the Government of Djibouti to achieve by 2017 the following r esults: (i) scale up to
the national level a comprehensive package of high -impact interventions in the areas
of early childhood survival and development, particularly among the poorest
population groups; (ii) strengthen the prevention and treatment of HIV/ AIDS in
women of childbearing age, children and young people; (iii) ensure access to quality
education for children, especially from rural and poor urban areas; and (iv) carry
through important progress made in the area of child protection, especially with
regard to the registration of births, FGM and juvenile justice. In view of the
recurring drought in Djibouti, UNICEF will adopt an approach that links emergency
humanitarian interventions to long-term development activities through a natural
disaster risk reduction strategy. The programme will mainstream implementation of
the Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action (CCC). In order to
contribute to environmental protection, UNICEF will continue to promote the use of
renewable energies in programmes on health and access to water, sanitation and
hygiene and will continue to support the efforts of the Ministry of Water and Energy
to build its capacity to monitor water quality.
14. The programme will build on the rights-based programming approach, and
particularly on the following strategies: (i) capacity -building at the national,
regional and community levels; (ii) improvement of the legal and regulatory
framework in a manner consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women; and (iii) results-based management. Particular attention will be paid to
gender equity and to ensuring equity regardless of place of residence and household
income. The country office will continue to use advocacy to promote enjoyment of
the rights of children and women.
15. Child survival and development. This component of the programme, which
is aligned with the National Health Development Plan, will speed up the decline in
the rates of maternal, neonatal and infant/child ill health and death as a result of
acute respiratory infections, diarrhoea, malnutrition, HIV, complications associated
with pregnancy and childbirth and vaccine-preventable diseases. This component
focuses primarily on: (i) extending access to quality maternal, neonatal and child
health care; (ii) combating malnutrition; and (iii) providing drinking water, hygiene
and sanitation services.
16. UNICEF will support the efforts of the Government of Djibouti to draft and
adopt a national strategy on neonatal health and to implement and monitor a
comprehensive package of high-impact interventions, including: (i) pre- and postnatal preventive care and treatment for all women; (ii) immunization;
(iii) deworming; (iv) micronutrient supplementation; and (v) periodic preventative
treatment of malaria and provision of insecticide-treated nets for pregnant and
breastfeeding women and children under five. UNICEF will continue to support
implementation of the national nutrition policy, and particularly the scaling-up of
treatment of severe acute malnutrition, in order to establish partnerships and
strategies for combating chronic malnutrition and increasing the resilience of
populations threatened by natural disasters and hazards. Effective implementation of
the Code of Marketing for Breastmilk Substitutes and the promotion of exclusive
breastfeeding will be supported.

6

17. With regard to water, sanitation and hygiene, UNICEF will continue to
contribute to achievement of the national objectives concerning access to drinking
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). Hygiene education and the installation of
WASH infrastructure in schools and community centres will help to reduce
diarrhoeal diseases. UNICEF will help the Government find solutions to water
shortages, particularly in areas where drinking water is supplied by tankers. A
special effort will be made to increase access to sanitation services, particularly in
peri-urbain areas of the city of Djibouti. These actions will contribute to child
survival and development and build the capacities of central, regional and
community entities, including women’s associations.
18. Children, young people and HIV/AIDS. This programme component will
strengthen the strategies and efforts of the Gover nment of Djibouti and other
partners to combat HIV/AIDS. It will focus on preventing mother -to-child
transmission (PMTCT) of HIV and HIV prevention among adolescents and young
adults. The PMTCT programme will support efforts to expand access to and use of
counselling, testing and treatment services to include 80 per cent of pregnant
women living with HIV and their children. The sub-component of HIV prevention
among adolescents and young adults seeks to develop life skills and will focus on
cross-cutting educational aspects as they relate to daily life, and particularly to
combating HIV/AIDS. The aim will be to provide 90 per cent of children and young
people aged 12 to 24 with correct information on the prevention and transmission of
HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections. The prevention of early marriage
and the various forms of gender-based violence and abuse will be integrated into the
life skills training, educational curricula and youth associations. A strategy for
encouraging and promoting young peoples’ participation and involvement in
development programmes that concern them will be supported through youth
associations and schools.
19. Quality education for all. This programme component will support the
Government’s national objective of improving the quality of education and
achieving universal primary education by 2015. As specified in the education master
plan, the focus will be on improving quality, making learning relevant and reducing
disparities. It will promote access to preschool and pri mary education through
projects in schools and target areas with low enrolment rates. The programme will
seek to improve girl-boy parity in the transition to secondary school both by
continuing to support the “book policy” and by advocating for subsidized or free
books and for the systematic involvement of communities in educational projects. In
consultation with the Ministry of Education, UNICEF will take specific steps to
increase girls’ secondary school enrolment, particularly in rural areas. Nomadic
peoples in rural areas, migrant families and disadvantaged groups in urban areas
will be specifically targeted.
20. The “child-friendly school” initiative will be pursued by promoting learning
quality and student-centred teaching methods and improving the school
environment. Projects will be launched in educational areas such as teacher training,
the provision of textbooks and improvement in teaching methods. The teaching of
life skills, including good hygiene practices, such as washing hands with soap, and
skills that make the educational environment healthy, safe and inclusive, such as
access to drinking water and separate latrines for boys and girls, will also be
supported. The goal of ensuring access to quality education for all children will be

7

pursued and advanced though social mobilization activities to promote the education
of children, especially girls and other vulnerable children.
21. Child protection. This programme component aims to strengthen the
protective environment for all children by: (a) for mulating new legislation to expand
and strengthen the legal system for child protection and establishing standard
procedures for recording births in the civil registry and regularizing the status of
children without birth certificates beyond the statutory time limits through social
mobilization activities to reinforce behaviour changes; (b) promoting community
empowerment by improving communities’ human rights competencies so that they
are able to monitor violations of children’s rights; UNICEF will support the
establishment of an awareness-raising committee composed of members of the
Community Management Committee, religious leaders and elected local officials in
order to conduct participatory monitoring as a strategy for ending all forms of
violence, including harmful practices such as FGM; (c) strengthening the
enforcement of legislation for the protection of children in contact with the law;
implementation and harmonization of such legislation; research and data collection;
and monitoring the implementation of international conventions. This component
will also involve substantial investment in protection systems and services in order
to ensure that children are protected against all forms of violence, exploitation,
discrimination, abuse and neglect and that the enjoyment of their rights is promoted
and ensured by: (i) improving access to and the quality of child protection and
justice services by building the capacities of stakeholders (the courts, police and
social services); (ii) strengthening birth registration services; and (iii) strengthening
the child protection information system within justice, police and child protection
departments.
22. Cross-sectoral. This programme component covers the operational and
logistical aspects of the country programme and improvements to the management
capacities of the country office. It will cover implementation of the programme and
some of the country office’s operating costs and expenses related to monitoring and
evaluation, gap analysis in support of Government soc ial policies (including survey
and census data analysis), and emergency preparedness and response.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
23. The cooperation programme will contribute to achievement of the national
results outlined in the National Initiative for Social Development (INDS), launched
by the President of the Republic in 2007 and updated in 2011, which seeks to tackle
rampant poverty, improve peoples’ living conditions and promote the employment
and integration of the most underprivileged young people through four strategic
aims: (i) growth, competitiveness and employment; (ii) access to basic social
services; (iii) reducing poverty and vulnerability; and (iv) public governance. The
cooperation programme is aligned with and contributes to each of the UNDAF
strategic aims: (i) governance and gender; (ii) basic social services; and (iii) climate
change and disaster risk reduction.
Relationship to international priorities
24. The programme results are aligned with the Millennium Declaration and the
MDGs and focus on equity and gender. They take into account the priorities of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan 2006-2013. The programme will help to

8

develop the country’s capacities to respect, protect and promote the rights of
children and women as set out in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
focusing in particular on the most underprivileged and the most vulnerable.
UNICEF will coordinate the drafting of the next report and ensure follow-up to
recommendations.
Major partnerships
25. With regard to partnerships, in addition to France, the most active donors are
the European Union, the World Bank, the African Development Bank (ADB), the
United States of America, Japan, China and some Arab countries. Most of the
internationally known NGOs are not established in the country. There is little
participation and involvement of private companies in the financing of activities that
seek to improve living conditions and reduce poverty. Most of the funds raised by
UNICEF are earmarked for emergencies; this does not allow for resources to be
made available permanently for development.
26. In the context of the UNDAF and of implementation of the countr y
programme, UNICEF will strengthen its relationships and consolidate its synergies
with other United Nations agencies. Joint programming in the areas of HIV/AIDS,
human rights, maternal health and reduction of vulnerability to risks and natural
disasters will be implemented within the framework of the existing thematic groups.
The partnership forged with the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) and the Agence française de développement (AFD) will be
strengthened in the fields of education and health. Partnerships will be developed
with the World Bank, the ADB, the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) in support of the establishment of a strategy for social protection and
expanded access to education for nomadic and migrant children. Civil society,
women’s associations and national and local media will play a key role in achieving
the programme goals. The partnership with opinion-makers and political,
parliamentary, religious, traditional and administrative authorities will be
strengthened. Children, adolescents and young adults will be key actors throughout
the process of implementing, monitoring and evaluating the 2013 -2017 cooperation
programme.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
27. Coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the programme will be in synergy
with the mechanisms set out in the UNDAF and the INDS. The Djibouti DevInfo
database, implemented in collaboration with all sectors, will be the monitoring tool
for the programme, the UNDAF and the INDS. UNICEF will support the
establishment of decentralized services to collect and analyse disaggregated data
that take into account differences between the sexes, the geographic regions and the
most vulnerable population groups in order to address equity issues. The monitoring
and evaluation system will focus primarily on collecting and analysing data on
bottlenecks. The mid-term evaluation will be held in the second quarter of 2015; to
that end, the programme will conduct behavioural surveys in the areas of HIV,
water, hygiene and sanitation in collaboration with other United Nations agencies,
competent sectoral departments and the Department of Statistics and Demographic
Studies (DISED). In particular, the programme will work with the Ministry of

9

Health, the Office of the Secretary of State for National Solidarity and DISED to
conduct household health and poverty surveys. A multi-phase approach to analysis
of the situation of children and women will be developed with a view to its dynamic
update.

10

