Dominican Republic
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for the Dominican
Republic (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.41) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular
session (12-15 September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

3.8

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

32

Underweight (per cent, moderate and severe, 2007)

7

(per cent, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
100 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008, adjusted)
Primary school enrolment (per cent, male/female, 2007)

87/90 b

Primary schoolchildren completing final primary grade (per cent 2007)

78

Use of improved drinking water sources (per cent, 2008)

86

Use of improved sanitation facilities (per cent, 2008)

83

Adult HIV prevalence rate (per cent)

0.9

Child work (per cent, children 5-14 years old, 2000)

10

Birth registration (per cent, under 5 years old)

78

%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest, 2006
GNI per capita (US$)

82

One-year-olds immunized against measles (per cent)

79

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women is available at
www.childinfo.org/.
160 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2007 estimate developed by the Infant
Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World
Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see:
http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Database.

The situation of children and women
1.
The population of the Dominican Republic is 9.3 million, 1 of which 48
per cent is under 18 years of age.
2.
The Dominican Republic has ratified a number of international treaties
concerning children and its legal and institutional framework recognizes the
obligation of the State to guarantee, respect and protect the rights of children
and adolescents. Nevertheless, in 2008 the Committee on the Rights of the
Child called upon the Government to amend its laws, regulations and practices
in order clearly to prohibit all types of discrimination against children and to
ensure full compliance in order to guarantee the right of all children to equal
treatment.
3.
Major institutional and political transformations since the late 1990s
have strengthened the rule of law and democracy as the country’s political
model. Political and macroeconomic stability have been enhanced, thereby
promoting increased economic growth over the past decade, with GDP
currently at approximately 6 per cent.

__________________

2

4 530

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (per cent)

†

1

82/70
59/97

Preliminary figures from the ninth Population Census, 2010.

4.
The Dominican Republic must take better advantage of the opportunities
created by institutional transformation and growth in order to be in a position
to strengthen sustainable human development, particularly as concerns
children. Notwithstanding the progress achieved, inequalities persist and in
some cases are increasing. Large numbers of children living in the bateyes (the
communities originally concentrated in and around sugar plantations and
mills), marginal urban areas and poor rural areas in the major provinces and
along the border have yet to benefit. The human development index of the
Dominican Republic is one of the ten lowest (0.663) in the region. 2
5.
The maternal mortality rate declined from 187 per 100, 000 live births in
1991 to 159 in 2007. 3 However, this figure is very high for a country where 95
per cent of pregnant women receive prenatal care and 98 per cent 4 of births are
attended by qualified personnel. Neonatal mortality, which accounts for some
70 per cent of infant deaths, has remained unchanged over the past 20 years.
Both of the mortality rates resulted from preventable conditions. The lack of
early diagnostic procedures to detect possible congenital malformations makes
it difficult to design timely interventions to enable all children to thrive from
birth. The 2006 National Household Survey reported that 4.5 per cent of
children aged 2 to 9 have some form of disability. Global malnutrition is at
3.1 per cent nationwide, 10.5 per cent 5 in border areas and 14 per cent among
children born to Haitian mothers. 6
6.
Basic education, comprising eight grades, is nearly univ ersal. Attendance
increased from 80 per cent in the early 1990s to 92 per cent currently. 7
However, 26 per cent of 5-year-olds do not attend preschool, which is
compulsory. 8 Forty-eight per cent of female children and 63 per cent of male
children 13 to 17 years of age do not attend secondary school, a figure that
increases in the border regions to 75 per cent and 85 per cent for females and
males, respectively. 9 The percentage of students who are older than the
average is 12 per cent at the primary level and 21 per cent at the secondary
level. 10 Poverty, lack of birth certificates (which is compulsory for secondaryschool registration), violence and pregnancy are factors that cause adolescents
to leave school. Education quality is another challenge. In a regional
assessment conducted in 2008 the Dominican Republic came in last in the
areas of reading, mathematics and science (SERCE, 2008). 11 Such failings are
the result of weaknesses in the education-system decentralization process and
in the management capacity of regional and district bodies. Investment in
education is barely 2.2 per cent of GDP, 12 whereas the General Education Law
(Law 66-97) mandates 4 per cent.
__________________
2
3

4
5
6

7
8

9
10
11

12

Human Development Report 2010, UNDP.
National Report on the Millennium Development Goals, 2010, Ministry of Economy,
Planning and Development.
ENHOGAR 2006, National Statistical Office (ONE).
ENDESA, 2007.
Política Social: Capacidades y Derechos (Social Policy: Capacity and Rights), Ministry
of Economy, Planning and Development, 2010.
ENHOGAR, National Statistical Office, 2006.
Cáceres and Morillo, Situación de la Niñez en República Dominicana (The Situation of
Children in the Dominican Republic), 2008.
Ibid.
Ministry of Education (MINERD, 2009-2010).
Segundo Estudio Regional Comparativo y Explicativo (Second Regional Comparative and
Explanatory Study (SERCE)), UNESCO, 2008.
Statistical Bulletin, Ministry of Education, 2010.
3

7.
Violence against children occurs at home, school and in other settings.
Corporal or psychological punishment is used to discipline children in 82 per
cent of households. 13 In 2009, the Human Rights Council recommended that
the Government should “prohibit corporal punishment of children in all
settings”. A study on commercial sexual exploitation 14 revealed that only 3 per
cent of the population considers perpetrators to be the responsible party, while
59 per cent blame the victim and the victim’s family, signalling a culture that
legitimizes abuse and inadequately enforces legislation. A total of 20.8 per
cent of the under-5 population is not officially registered in birth records and
the figure rises to 41 per cent in the poorest quintile, 15 leaving thousands of
children facing life without an official identity or access to basic services. In
2008, the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that the
Dominican Government should take steps to ensure that no children remain ed
stateless.
8.
The HIV/AIDS epidemic has tended to stabilize (0.8 per cent). 16
However, owing to inadequate investment in preventive programmes the
infection rate has remained elevated in high-risk groups, including drug users
(8 per cent), men who have sexual relations with other men (6.1 per cent) and
sex workers (4.5 per cent). 17 The absence of effective prevention policies and
programmes within and outside the education system leaves adolescents
vulnerable to HIV infection. Only 14 per cent of pregnant women are screened
for HIV; the prevalence of vertical transmission of HIV is high, at 10 per
cent; 18 and the rate of congenital syphilis is 1 per cent. 19 Persons living with
and affected by HIV continue to face stigma and discrimination.
9.
The Dominican Republic is situated in the path of hurricanes. This threat,
together with the impact of climate change and seismic movements, exposes
the population to many risks. Children in poor rural and marginal urban areas
are particularly vulnerable. One of the major challenges the country will have
to face in the next few years is the need to improve its emergency
preparedness and response systems, with an emphasis on protecting children
and families.
Relationship to national priorities and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF)
10. The Draft Law on the National Development Strategy for 2010 -2030
expresses the Government’s willingness to confront development challenges
and achieve peaceful coexistence, social cohesion and collective developmen t.
Universal health care and social security, quality education for all, sports and
recreation, employment and decent housing, equality and equity and poverty
__________________
13
14

15

16
17

18
19

4

ENHOGAR, 2006.
El Comercio sexual con personas menores de edad. Segundo estudio de tolerancia social
(Commercial Sex with Minors in Central America, Panama and the Dominican Republic.
Second Social Tolerance Study), ILO/IPEC, 2009.
ENHOGAR 2009-2010. Official publication of this survey is planned for November 2011.
The use of this most updated data was authorized by the National Office of Statistics.
ENDESA, 2007.
Primera Encuesta de Vigilancia de Comportamiento con Vinculación Serológica en
Poblaciones Vulnerables (First Behavioral Surveillance of Serostatus in Vulnerable
Populations), 2008.
Informe de Acceso Universal (Universal Access Report), DIGECITSS, 2011.
Encuesta Nacional de Vigilancia Centinela (National Sentinel Vigilance Survey), 2006.

alleviation are among the Strategy’s objectives directly affecting the wellbeing and development of children.
11. The main strategies under the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for 2012-2016 that will facilitate achievement of the objectives set
out in the National Development Strategy are (a) protection of children,
adolescents and youth; (b) empowerment and rights of women; (c) socio economic inclusion; and (d) environmental sustainability and natural disaster
risk reduction.
12. The UNICEF medium-term strategic plan has helped to place the rights
of children at the centre of the Dominican Republic’s development
programmes and of the cooperation provided by the United Nations system,
leading to a fruitful association between the UNDAF and the new programme
outlined here, the National Development Strategy.
Relationship to international priorities
13. The programme focuses on achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) and on implementing the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and the
recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2008.
The programme incorporates the recommendations of the Uni ted Nations
study on violence against children and international commitments regarding
the prevention and elimination of sexual exploitation of children and
adolescents, and is in line with the Education Goals for 2021 put forward by
the Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture
and with the Ministerial Declaration “Preventing through education” adopted
in Mexico.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
14. Monitoring of the situation of children and evidence-based policy
development
have
been
recognized
as
significant
programme
accomplishments. The implementation assessment of the Code for the System
of Protection of the Fundamental Rights of Children and Adolescents, 20
institutional ethnography and research on the impact of violence, sexual abuse
and exploitation merit special mention. Institutions providing protection have
incorporated recommendations from these evaluations in their plans, and have
accorded priority to establishing statistical information systems and
formulating an institutional coordination protocol to assist child and
adolescent victims of violence, abuse and commercial sexual exploitation. The
joint evaluation of the National Programme to Reduce Vertical Transmission
of HIV/AIDS has enabled the Ministry of Health and its collaborators to
reorient the strategy and increase their coverage.
15. Collaboration with the National Statistical Office (ONE) for the purpose
of generating credible official information regarding the sta tus of children and
women has highlighted territorial inequities and inequalities and identified
which groups in society are the most excluded. Using the evidence gathered,
__________________
20

Law 136-03.
5

the Children’s and Adolescents’ Rights Observatory at the Catholic University
of Santo Domingo created the Children’s and Adolescents’ Rights Fulfilment
Index, which is a national monitoring tool.
16. Under the leadership of the National Council for Children and
Adolescents (CONANI) and the Ministry of Education, the Consultative Panel
on Early Childhood was established to develop an integrated policy on health,
nutrition and early stimulation, with particular reference to children under 3
years of age. UNICEF helped to coordinate action taken by public entities and
civil society and to scale up pilot projects in nurseries and community
playgrounds.
17. The “Iodized Salt or No Salt” campaign led to increased consumption of
iodized salt. As a result, iodine-deficiency disorders no longer are a public
health problem.
18. A study conducted by UNICEF, the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO) and the Ministry of Health regarding water quality and basic
sanitation at 11 hospitals revealed the poor quality of water quality in
maternity wards and its correlation with high maternal and neonatal mortality
rates. The study’s findings led to the installation of constantly monitored water
purification filters at five hospitals. The study also helped to identify the group
of actors responsible for water and sanitation and to design the cholera
prevention campaign.
19. With the strengthening of the country’s emergency preparedness,
response and recovery capabilities in connection with Hurricane Noel and
tropical storm Olga in 2007 and the earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010, the
office has become a key player with respect to such disasters.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

High-quality inclusive social services for
health and education

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 489 000

2 185 000

3 674 000

Protection of children and adolescents, and
institutional reform

993 000

2 880 000

3 873 000

Knowledge generation and policy support
for social inclusion and equity

363 000

2 440 000

2 803 000

Cross-sectoral costs

905 000

2 495 000

3 400 000

3 750 000

10 000 000

13 750 000

Total

Programme preparation process
20. The cooperation programme is based on: (a) the 2009 midterm review;
(b) the 2008 recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
(c) the National Development Strategy for 2010-2030; (d) the Common
Country Assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for 2012-2016; and (e) contributions provided by State institutions
and civil society at strategic thinking workshops.
6

Goals, major results and strategy
21. The programme, which will be equity-driven, will help to accelerate
achievement of the MDGs and implementation of the Millennium Declaration
and will focus on children, adolescents, the poorest and most excluded
communities and victims of discrimination. This will be achieved by scaling
up investments, reducing national disparities and eliminating practices that
apply differential treatment.
22. The overall objective of the programme is to enable children and
adolescents to enjoy their rights. This will be possible when the country has
made progress towards eliminating barriers to access to quality social services,
creating protective community environments and building a grand social
alliance for the monitoring and achievement of those rights.
23. Key results of the programme will be: (a) reduced disparities in access to
inclusive, quality social services in the areas of health and education; (b)
increased capacity of State institutions to protect children against violence,
abuse, exploitation and trafficking; and (c) generation of knowledge to support
the incorporation of inclusive policies and increased investment in children.
24. The following strategies will be employed to achieve these results:
(a) increased national and local capacity for managing basic social services
with a view to improving coverage and quality and reducing gaps; (b)
prioritization of ten provinces in the southeast and along the border, in
selected bayetes and in marginalized areas in Santo Domingo and Santiago; (c)
alliances with civil society, knowledge centres, communications media and the
private sector to enhance universal fulfilment of human rights; and (d) social
mobilization in support of the rights of all children who live in the Dominican
Republic.
25. There are four cross-cutting components: (a) participation of children
and adolescents; (b) comprehensive management of risks and basic
commitments regarding children; (c) communication to promote changes in
practices and behaviours that guarantee equal treatment and social inclusion of
all children; and (d) gender equity in order to reduce exclusion, discrimination
and vulnerability.
26. South-South cooperation between Haiti and the Dominican Republic will
be encouraged in order to optimize the impact of the two countries’
interventions and ensure the inclusion of the most vulnerable groups.
Particular emphasis will be placed on preventing child trafficking and
smuggling, protecting unaccompanied Haitian victims and children, and
combating HIV and other diseases common to both countries. With support
from other UNICEF offices, and in coordination with the Government,
technical assistance will be shared by the regional public administrations for
health, education and justice.
Programme components
27. In order to enable the Dominican State to meet its obligations to ensure
the achievement of children’s rights, the 2012-2016 country programme will
comprise three components focusing primarily on reducing inequalities and
ensuring social services for all.
Inclusive, quality social services in the areas of health and education

7

28. This component will help to eliminate all barriers that deny the poorest
children and adolescents access to quality social services.
29. Within the framework of the National Development Strategy, the Tenyear Health Plan 2007-2015 and the “Zero Tolerance” strategy, action will be
taken to (a) reduce maternal and neonatal mortality in prioritized hospitals; (b)
reduce mother-to-child transmission of HIV and the incidence of congenital
syphilis; (c) expand coverage provided by health and nutrition programmes for
the comprehensive care of young children; and (d) continue to control the
cholera epidemic.
30. In order to reduce maternal and child mortality, UNICEF will assist in
implementing the new criteria for the Amigos de la Niñez y la Madre
(“Friends of Children and Mothers”) hospital initiative at 11 hospitals with the
highest incidence of maternal and neonatal mortality. Support also will be
provided to reactivate the Newborn Alliance and implement the protocol for
monitoring the causes of neonatal morbidity and for early identification of
potential disabilities. Adolescents Units will be strengthened and coordinated
with the education system. Exclusive breastfeeding will continue to be
promoted, as will complementary feeding with micronutrients and early
growth and development measures. UNICEF will promote the integration of
successful community strategies into State health and social protection
programmes. Assistance will also be provided to implement the protocol for
eliminating congenital syphilis and mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
31. Support will be continue to be provided for the efforts of the Ministry of
Health to control the cholera epidemic through enhanced coordination between
the responsible actors in the water, sanitation and hygiene sector and by
increasing access for the most vulnerable families to safe water. Community
hygiene practices will be improved through social mobilization.
32. With regard to the survival and full development of children, UNICEF
will continue its work with the State and civil society under the Early
Childhood Comprehensive Care Policy. The social security system will be
encouraged gradually to expand the number and capacity of nurseries in poor
neighbourhoods and poor rural areas and include family- and communitybased models as components of strategies for comprehensive early childhood
care. Assistance will also be provided for early stimulation training for
community teachers and assistants.
33. With regard to education, the programme will support the
implementation of the National Education Plan and the Education Goals for
2021, which are strategies to foster cultural change and human development.
The component will focus on (a) enhancing the quality and coverage of
preschool education; (b) spurring progress in enhancing learning achievement
at the primary and secondary levels; and (c) reducing the secondary-school
dropout rate.
34. In order to improve learning achievement and the quality of the
education process, the management capacity of the education system at the
regional and district levels will be strengthened. To reduce the dropout rate
and increase retention, the programme will assist the Ministry of Educat ion
with late birth registration of children and adolescents attending school and
with capacity development for implementing the integral component of life
skills, which aims to reduce teenage pregnancies and HIV transmission and to
foster the values of coexistence and citizenship.

8

35. The cross-cutting components in the area of education will be:
(a) communication and social mobilization to reduce school violence and
develop capacities for inclusive education of children with special needs; (b)
monitoring of access and quality indicators throughout the country under the
Ten-Year Education Plan; (c) strengthening the integral capacity of risk
management; and (d) promoting the participation of children, adolescents,
families and communities in school management.
Protection of children and adolescents, and institutional reform
36. UNICEF will help to bolster the leadership role of the National Council
for Children and Adolescents (CONANI) and will assist institutions of social
protection, the judicial branch and civil society organizations in building their
capacity to (a) protect children from violence, abuse, exploitation and
trafficking; (b) guarantee all children the right to identity by increasing the
birth registration rate; and (c) reduce the number o f children who are
institutionalized owing to poverty or conflict with the law. The State will
continue to receive support in implementing Law 136 -03, the Code for the
System of Protection of the Fundamental Rights of Children and Adolescents;
the recommendations of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
concerning violence; and the recommendations of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child.
37. In order to protect children and adolescents from violence, abuse,
exploitation and trafficking, the programme will support the country’s efforts
to (a) legally prohibit violence and corporal punishment as forms of discipline
in all settings; (b) expand the coverage and improve the quality of social
protection programmes and services for children who are victim s of violence,
abuse, trafficking and exploitation; and (c) establish complaint mechanisms
accessible to children, as well as an information reporting system.
38. In order to end low birth registration, UNICEF will collaborate with the
Central Electoral Board, the Ministry of Health and Education and community
and religious organizations to improve registration practices and accelerate
implementation of the 2010-2016 strategic plan of the Electoral Board.
Priority will be given to provinces and urban areas with the highest
concentration of unregistered children by (a) ensuring that civil registry units
in hospitals in the Friends of Children and Mothers initiative are fully
operational and (b) conducting late registration campaigns for unregistered
children. Legislative initiatives to simplify procedures and reduce the time
required for late registration also will receive support.
39. In order to reduce the institutionalization of children and adolescents,
UNICEF will continue supporting the efforts of CONA NI to (a) implement the
programme for alternative child-care options and (b) strengthen the system for
certifying, registering and monitoring community host organizations in
accordance with international standards. UNICEF will continue to collaborate
with the Office of the Public Prosecutor and the judicial branch to democratize
the juvenile justice system by (a) specialization of juvenile courts; (b) creating
an independent mechanism to monitor detention centres; and (c) promoting the
national programme on socio-community alternatives to institutional
confinement.
Knowledge management and policy development for social inclusion and
equity

9

40. In keeping with the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of
the Child and in compliance with international standards, the programme will
help to strengthen national capacity to generate and analyse quality,
disaggregated information on children and adolescents that will highlight the
most excluded and marginalized groups and facilitate the design of cost effective interventions. This will be achieved in a number of ways : (a) in
cooperation with the National Statistical Office (ON E), CONANI and the
Office of the Public Prosecutor, a subsystem will be created to develop
statistical data disaggregated by gender, age, race, origin, territory and socioeconomic status; (b) studies, assessments, research and analyses will be
carried out in order to identify the causes of social exclusion of children and
adolescents, analyse the impact of political and economic decisions and
generate evidence that will help to improve the quality and coverage of
education and the quality of health services, reduce the prevalence of HIV and
eliminate all forms of violence against children. This work will be undertaken
in collaboration with national and international knowledge centres, and
sustained attention will be paid to the impact of c limate change and migration
on children; and (c) knowledge will be disseminated in order to build
national alliances, influence decision-making and advocate for the fulfilment
of the rights of all children who live in the Dominican Republic .
41. With assistance from the National Congress and other monitoring bodies,
support will be provided to conduct budgetary and economic analyses of laws
in order to ensure the fiscal sustainability of social programmes in the areas of
health, education and protection. By taking into account successful
experiences and knowledge generated in the Dominican Republic and the
region, the programme will help to build national capacities for monitoring
and evaluating the objectives of the National Development Strategy that focus
on children.
42. Support will continue to be provided to the Child and Youth Town
Councils in order to broaden participation by children and adole scents in
municipal decision-making processes and improve their ability to prevent
violence and enforce their rights. Cooperation will continue with the
Children’s and Adolescents’ Rights Observatory on knowledge generation and
articulation with other monitoring processes.
Cross-sectoral costs
43. Cross-sectoral costs cover a proportion of common operational costs,
monitoring and evaluation as well as technical assistance for several country
programme components.
Major partnerships
44. Main Government bodies are CONANI, the Ministries of Health and
Education, the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Development, Congress,
the judicial branch and the Office of the Attorney-General, the National
Commission on State Reform, the National Statistical Offic e and the Cámara
de Cuentas (audit court). At the local level, UNICEF will work with
decentralized bodies concerned with health, education and protection , and
local governments.
45. The process of preparing the Common Country Assessment and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework for 2012-2016
strengthened coordination and joint planning among the agencies of the United
10

Nations system. UNICEF will collaborate with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Internatio nal Organization
for Migration in protecting irregular and unaccompanied immigrant children
and in combating child trafficking and smuggling. UNICEF will cooperate
with the Pan American Health Organization, the United Nations Population
Fund, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and UN-Women on
reducing maternal and infant mortality and HIV, encouraging participation of
adolescents and youth, improving sexual and reproductive health and
promoting gender equality. UNICEF will cooperate with the Uni ted Nations
Development Programme on governance issues.
46. UNICEF is a member of the Mesa de Donantes (board of donors), a
coordinating body that brings together the major organizations providing
international, multilateral and bilateral cooperation, incl uding the World Bank,
the Inter-American Development Bank, the European Union, the United States
Agency for International Development and the Spanish Agency for
International Development Cooperation.
47. The new cooperation programme offers new opportunities to expand
alliances with religious and civil society organizations.
48. Strategic alliances will be established with the private sector in order to
strengthen corporate social responsibility and to serve as a catalyst, and
maximize resources, for the benefit of children and adolescents in the
Dominican Republic.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
49. UNICEF will support monitoring and evaluation of the status of children
and compliance with the recommendations of the Committee on the Rig hts of
the Child. To that end, it will contribute to capacity-building at the national
and local levels and will continue to help the National Statistical Office to
generate statistical information on issues relevant to the cooperation
programme through the identification of social groups and territories with high
levels of social inequality.
50. The situation analysis to be conducted in 2011 will serve as the baseline
for monitoring and evaluating the results of the 2012 -2016 programme. A fiveyear monitoring and evaluation plan will be prepared and will determine the
mechanisms for the evaluation. The midterm review will provide an
opportunity to incorporate required changes and adjustments.
51. The Ministry of Economy, Planning and Development, as the ins titution
responsible for planning and evaluating public policy, will be the main entity
responsible for the annual workplan reviews and the midterm review, all the
while recognizing the benefit of those exercises for its own capacity -building
efforts. The annual reviews will be carried out within the context of UNDAF,
with input from implementing agencies of the Dominican Republic and the
United Nations system.

11

