Eastern Caribbean multi-country programme
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for the Eastern
Caribbean multi-country programme (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.16) was
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its
2011 annual session (20-23 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The eight autonomous Caribbean countries making up the Eastern Caribbean
area (Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago) and the
four British Overseas Territories (Anguilla, British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands) range in population from 5,000 (Montserrat) to
1.32 million (Trinidad and Tobago). The poverty rate in the area ranges from 14 per
cent in Barbados to 39 per cent in Dominica. The situation of those living under the
poverty line is exacerbated by high income inequality: the richest 20 per cent of the
population receives 57 per cent of total income, while the poorest 20 per cent
receives less than 3 per cent. 1 Children account for a disproportionate share of the
poor in these Small Island Developing States (SIDS). An estimated one half of
children in Grenada are income-poor, for example. Children account for about
40 per cent of all income-poor people in Saint Kitts and Nevis. 2
2.
The most disadvantaged girls and boys in the Eastern Caribbean include an
estimated 250,000 3 children from income-poor families, as well as poor children
(non-income-poor) from rural areas and outlying islands and those at risk of
violence, abuse, exploitation and discrimination. These include, for example, boys
and girls who have dropped out of school; children living on the street, in conflict
with the law or in institutions; children affected by migration or HIV/AIDS;
children with disabilities; and indigenous children in Dominica.
3.
Women and girls in the Eastern Caribbean suffer from a number of
inequalities, such as unequal distribution of power and resources among household
members, gender-based violence, physical insecurity and in some cases
discriminatory legislation. Women are disproportionately represented in insecure
and poorly paid employment and face inequalities in pay. Approximately 50 per cent
of the 1 million households in the subregion are headed by women. In Grenada
40 per cent of children in non-nuclear-family households live with their mothers
only, compared to 3 per cent who live with their fathers only. 4
4.
Progress towards attainment of the Millennium Development Goals has been
steady by all countries. However, concerns remain about HIV and AIDS rates
(prevalence averages 0.77 per cent to 0.95 per cent 5), obesity, teenage pregnancy
(from 3 per cent of pregnancies in Trinidad and Tobago to 6 per cent in Saint
Lucia 6), childhood diabetes, undetected disabilities (and limited services to treat
them), low birthweight, low rates of exclusive breastfeeding and seasonal
environmental diseases such as dengue. Of particular concern ar e increasing infant
__________________
1

2

3

4
5

6

2

G. Galofré-i-Vilà, „An Overview of Socio-Economic Indicators in the Eastern Caribbean and
Implications for Children and Households‟, UNICEF, 2010.
National Social Safety Net Assessments, 2009, supported by UNICEF, UNIFEM and the World
Bank.
Estimations from UNICEF and the World Bank, „Compendium Report of Social Safety Net
Assessments (covering Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Barbados)‟, 2010.
Government of Grenada, Core Welfare Indicators Survey, CDB/UNDP, St. Georges, 2005.
Calculated on the basis of UNGASS country progress reports and data obtained from respective
countries. Variation exists because Saint Lucia‟s prevalence is determined to be between 0.22
per cent and 1.8 per cent.
Source: <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT>.

mortality rates in Trinidad and Tobago (from 3 per cent in 1990 to 3.1 per cent in
2008 7) and British Virgin Islands (from 2.1 per cent in 1998 to 2.5 per cent in
2007 8).
5.
All countries provide free and universal primary health care and primary
education. Access to antenatal care and to a skilled medical practitioner at birth is
either near or completely universal. However, early childhood development (ECD)
services on the islands are far from achieving „education for all‟. 9 Service coverage
is not comprehensive, and disadvantaged groups often lack access. The percentage
of children under 3 years old who enrol in formal early childhood centres and
preschools varies from 5 per cent in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to 53 per cent
in Saint Kitts and Nevis. For children 3 to 5 years old, enrolment ranges from 55 per
cent in Dominica to 100 per cent in Montserrat. 10 In the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS) subregion, only 18 per cent (144) of the 788 early
childhood education institutions are owned by governments; the remainder are
owned or sponsored by private operators, non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and faith-based organizations. The quality of many ECD programmes is inadequate.
6.
Average net enrolment in primary education in 2007 was 90 per cent, ranging
from 73.4 per cent in Antigua and Barbuda to 99 per cent in Saint Lucia. Declines
from previous years were reported in the British Virgin Islands, Grenada and Saint
Kitts and Nevis. Enrolment rates in secondary education are much lower than in
primary school, and rates are higher for girls (84 per cent) than for boys (77 per
cent). 11 Boys also generally underperform compared to girls in secondary school, as
reflected in the number of boys (33,377) compared to the num ber of girls (60,247)
who wrote the Caribbean Secondary School Certificate (CSEC) Examinations in the
eight OECS countries and Turks and Caicos. 12 In 2009, only 25 per cent of students
passed at least five subjects, 13 while 28 per cent did not pass any. Education
receives a relatively large share of national budgets (average of 6.8 per cent of gross
domestic product, or GDP, in 2007) 14 in the OECS and 4.3 per cent of GDP in
Trinidad and Tobago. 15 The low exam-passing rate, gender disparity and inequity
highlight a faltering education system.
7.
Violence and abuse against girls and boys is reported to be widespread and has
gradually increased. It is connected with the prevalence of gangs, drug and alcohol
use, risky sexual behaviour, teenage pregnancy, corporal p unishment, bullying, poor
educational attainment and youth unemployment. A recent study on child sexual
__________________
7
8

9

10

11
12

13

14
15

Source: <www.unicef.org/infobycountry/trinidad_tobago_statistics.html>.
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Children and their Families in the Eastern Caribbean (draft),
2010.
UNESCO Kingston Cluster Office for the Caribbean, „Early Childhood Care and Education in
the Caribbean Community‟, 2010. Report prepared for the World Conference on Early
Childhood Care and Education, Moscow, 27-29 September 2010.
S. William and L.C. Charles, „Early Childhood Care & Education in the Caribbean (CARICOM
states)‟, UNESCO, 2006, p. 13.
Average percentage over the 11 countries with enrolment figures from 2005-2008.
UNICEF, Draft Situational Analysis of Children and their Families in the Eastern Caribbean,
secondary school net enrolment rate (2003-2008).
Passing five subjects in the CXC is considered acceptable performance for matriculation and
entry level employment.
OECS Secretariat, „Towards a New OECS Education Development Agenda‟, Nov. 2009, p. 10.
Nation Master Trinidadian Tobagonian Education Statistics, <www.nationmaster.com/red/
country/td-trinidad-and-tobago/edu-e.

3

abuse estimated a prevalence rate of 20 per cent to 45 per cent for the Eastern
Caribbean Area. 16 Adolescents, especially boys and those out of school, face many
challenges growing up in the subregion. These include early initiation of sexual
activity and its consequences, male marginalization, mental health issues, obesity,
alcohol and drug abuse, migration of parents and disability.
8.
Rates of migration in the subregion remain among the highest in the world,
with the Eastern Caribbean exporting the largest proportion of its population in
percentage terms globally. 17 For example, the British Virgin Islands has an
emigrated population of 38.3 per cent and Antigua and Barbuda of 22.4 per cent. 18
The recent increase in migration from Haiti highlights the impact of natural
disasters on migration patterns.
9.
Eastern Caribbean SIDS are particularly vulnerable to natural disasters, such
as volcanoes, hurricanes, floods, earthquakes and tsunamis. The Composite
Commonwealth Vulnerability Index 19 lists these SIDS among the most vulnerable in
the world due to the prevalence of natural disasters, global warming and the
susceptibility of the economies to external factor s such as unfavourable trade
agreements, fluctuating oil prices and unpredictable incomes from tourism. In
particular, hurricanes cause catastrophic devastation to property and the lives of
children and their families. Hurricane Tomas in 2010 cost Barbados $8.5 million in
damages 20 and Saint Lucia at least $3.3 million. 21 It also left an estimated 20,000
children and their families without safe water for up to two months.
10. The global economic crisis has exacerbated the inherent structural weakness of
small, open and dependent economies and has slowed progress towards meeting the
Millennium Development Goals. The GDP of the OECS group of countries
contracted by 7.4 per cent in 2009. 22 In response, most countries have reduced their
public spending by almost one third. Unemployment has also increased
considerably, 23 and unemployment rates among young people (aged 15 -24) and
women are two to three times higher than the national rates. 24 Unemployed people
tend to rely on remittances from relatives abroad, engage in seasonal work or
migrate to find work within or outside the Caribbean. Throughout the Eastern
__________________
16

17

18

19

20

21
22
23

24

4

UNICEF, University of Huddersfield and Action for Children, „Child Sexual Abuse in the
Eastern Caribbean‟, 2009, p. 10.
UNICEF Barbados and Eastern Caribbean Office (BECO), „The Impact of Migration on
Children in the Caribbean‟, Aug. 2009, p. 1.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, „International
Migration Report 2006: A global assessment‟, at: <www.un.org/esa/population/publications/
2006_MigrationRep/Profiles_country.pdf>.
Commonwealth Secretariat/World Bank Task Force on Small States, „Small States: A composite
vulnerability index‟, 1999.
N. Brancker, „Business to get moving in Barbados‟, The Barbados Advocate, 8 November 2010,
p. 2, <www.barbadosadvocate.com/businessmonday/default_bottom.asp?RetrievePage=
20101108BMWWW/20101108_P2.jpg&TopNav=True&PageNumber=2>, retrieved
12 November 2010. Quoted material: “... as well as the fallout from the passage of Tropical
Storm Tomas, 20 miles to the South of Barbados, causing damages estimated at
BDS$17 million.”
Source: <www.caribbean360.com/index.php/news/st_vincent_news/47156.html>.
Source: <http://siteresources.worldbank.org/IDA/Resources/IDA-OECS.pdf>.
UNDP, „Social Implications of the Global Economic Crisis in Caribbean SIDS: Synthesis of the
findings of 7 country studies‟, Dec. 2009, p. 18.
G. Galofré-i-Vilà, op. cit.

Caribbean, a number of social safety net programmes endeavour to mitigate
particular vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, due to governments ‟ financial constraints
and political preferences, coverage of social safety net programmes is far from
universal. They do not reach even a majority of the income -poor and disadvantaged
women and children. 25
11. Reporting on implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child is
substantially delayed in the Eastern Caribbean Area, where 6 of the 12 countries
have outstanding and overdue reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Regarding all the countries, the Committee on the Rights of the Child is concerned
about the absence of comprehensive and current data in the State party reports and
the inadequacy of national data collection systems in all areas covered by the
Convention. The Committee notes that such data are crucial to formulate policies,
monitor and evaluate progress achieved, and ensure that policy and programme
changes target the most disadvantaged children. This remains a significant challenge
for the subregion. Key child rights issues remain regarding social exclusion,
inequality and violence, along with lack of social data and access to quality
learning, 26 especially for the poor and disadvantaged.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2011
Key results achieved
12. A number of research projects were carried out, providing a clearer
understanding of the current situation for children. These also assist in advocating
for policy changes to address the social policy gaps related to:
(a) Social assistance to income-poor and disadvantaged children, women and
their families;
(b) Identification of significant national and regional data needed on children
(which led to an OECS regional consensus on the introduction of the Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey, or MICS);
(c) Evidence on child protection issues such as sexual abuse, corporal
punishment, risky sexual and social behaviour, and the spread of HIV among
children and women (which sparked discussions in various Cabinets and the
development of national plans of action and communication campaigns);
(d)
rights;

Trends in national budget analysis with respect to fulfilment of children‟s

(e) Evaluating the impact of Health and Family Life Education (HFLE) and
NGO community-based adolescent mentoring programmes;
(f) The quality of learning in early childhood centres (which guided the
revision or establishment of national ECD policies);
__________________
25

26

UNICEF and World Bank, „Compendium Report of Social Safety Net Assessment (covering
Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Barbados) ‟,
2010.
Covering ECD and primary, secondary and vocational education.

5

(g) Describing good practices regarding environment, migration, the impact
of the economic crisis on children and the status of social investment in children in
SIDS as part of the SIDS Paper Series with the UNICEF Fiji Office;
(h) The evaluation of NGO-led models for reaching at-risk children and
adolescents outside classrooms, assisting UNICEF and its partners to strategically
formulate a more holistic focus on the well-being and positive development of
children within child-centred and non-discriminatory education and protection
systems, as proposed is this new multi-country programme for 2012-2016.
13. In partnership with the Caribbean Community and Common Market
(CARICOM), UNICEF has supported the development of online DevInfo databases
for sharing national data on children in the CARICOM Secretariat (CARICOMInfo)
and Saint Lucia (HelenInfo). The OECS Commission and four other States have
developed desktop versions of their databases. Following advocacy efforts by
UNICEF, the Regional Caribbean Census Coordinating Committee has adopted
CensusInfo as the platform for disseminating the 2010/2011 round of population
censuses throughout the Caribbean.
14. Six of the twelve countries met their reporting obligations to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child during the programme cycle. The review process leading to
development of reports in the other six countries has been initiated or restarted. The
Concluding Observations of the Committee were used as a framework for policy
improvements. They were also used to leverage support from the United Kingdom
Department for International Development to address some of the recommendations
for the British Overseas Territories.
15. In policy and programme development, UNICEF helped Grenada to formulate
and enact new child protection and family legislation that complies with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, while research on the impact of sexual abuse
led to the development of three national plans of action. As a member of the
Trinidad and Tobago Monitoring Committee of the Implementation of the National
Plan of Action for Children (NPA) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
UNICEF supported compilation of data on progress of NPA implementation. ECD
policy, standards and regulatory frameworks have been developed in four States. 27
The HFLE curriculum framework was expanded to cover the full primary and
secondary levels through an enhanced teacher training mechanism at the University
of the West Indies. The aim is to develop specialized HFLE teachers. UNICEF also
helped forge a partnership between the Commonwealth of Learning and the
University of the Southern Caribbean to develop the capacity of teachers in Trinidad
and Tobago on child-friendly school models and principles through in-service and
pre-service training.
16.

UNICEF supported five innovative programmes:

(a) Community-based rehabilitation programmes for children in conflict with
the law in Dominica, Grenada and Saint Lucia;
(b) Development of a child-friendly school approach with an emphasis on
alternative disciplinary practices in Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica and
__________________
27

6

ECD policy, standards and regulatory frameworks have been developed in Antigua and Barbuda,
Dominica, Montserrat and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

Saint Lucia, reaching 9,933 children from 33 primary/junior secondary schools
(13.4 per cent of primary/junior secondary schools);
(c) NGO-led models for reaching at-risk children and adolescents outside
classrooms (635 girls and 674 boys), to influence wider policy on programming for
positive adolescent development, especially for children who are poor, out of school
or having problems at school;
(d) Implementation of alternative and government-led early childhood
models to provide early stimulation interventions to poor, rural and under -served
children in children under age 3 in three countries;
(e) In Trinidad and Tobago, expansion of the national children‟s hotline
(ChildLine), which provides 24-hour access to a counselling and referral service,
with sustainable support from key line ministries.
17. In addition to advocacy, UNICEF has effectively used Communication for
Development to deliver targeted messages through videos, public service
announcements, poster and brochures to reinforce its policy and „modelling‟ support
to countries. In one example of the influence of this advocacy, a 2009 opinion pol l
in Barbados reported a major decline in approval of corporal punishment in schools.
Acceptance of physical punishment declined 15 per cent among adults (from 69 per
cent in 2004 to 54 per cent) and 18 per cent (from 74 per cent to 56 per cent) among
children.
18. After the category-4 Hurricane Ike in September 2008, UNICEF interventions
in the Turks and Caicos Islands allowed schools to reopen within two weeks of the
disaster. Psychosocial care was provided for 15 per cent of school -going girls and
boys through the Return to Happiness programme and provision of tents. The year
2010 was the wettest rainy season on record for Trinidad and Tobago. UNICEF
provided girls and boys with school kits to facilitate their return to school in one of
the poorest and most affected flood areas. In the aftermath of Hurricane Tomas in
Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in October 2010, UNICEF
assisted girls, boys and their families in the hardest hit areas by providing safe
drinking water, hygiene kits, tents for schools and psychosocial support.
Lessons learned
19. To remain an effective and relevant partner in a middle -income region and to
influence policy development for children and monitoring of their rights, UNICEF
needs to assist countries to collect and use relevant, disaggregated and consistent
data and develop baselines on the situation of children. This will require
establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems for all supported models and
sector system changes. The evidence must be used to provide more support to
facilitate compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and State party
reporting to its Committee.
20. UNICEF support to community groups for a project to help adolescents to
protect themselves from HIV and resolve conflicts has shown the need for a more
holistic focus on children‟s well-being and positive development within a childcentred and non-discriminatory education and protection systems. The new
programme will look at learning throughout the life cycle, from e arly childhood (up
to 8 years) to early adolescence (9-14 years) and adolescence (15-18 years). The
priority will be on keeping children in and connected to school, as it is one of the

7

major pillars of the protective environment. Other efforts to strengthe n the
protective environment will focus on laws and policies compliant with the
Convention and other international standards.
21. The economic crisis has shown that the social assistance systems in the SIDS
in the Eastern Caribbean Area do not adequately protect children, especially the
income-poor and most disadvantaged, during external shocks. To address pockets of
child poverty and disparity, UNICEF will need to increase its support to policy and
programming for child-sensitive social protection.

The multi-country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Evidence-based advocacy and capacity-building
for equity-sensitive policy and programme
development

8 500

6 000

14 500

Lifelong learning and protection

5 500

6 500

12 000

Cross-sectoral costs

2 000

2 500

4 500

16 000

15 000

31 000

Total

Preparation process
22. The preparation of the multi-country programme for the Eastern Caribbean
Area began with the midterm review conducted between December 2009 and June
2010 for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean, and in September 2010 for Trinidad
and Tobago. The review was a consultative and participatory exercise and included
the following key milestones: (a) preparation of an updated situation analysis;
(b) preparation of evaluations and analyses; (c) two multi -country cluster
consultations with government officials, NGOs and civil society; (d) two
consultations with adolescents; (e) a consultation with the Government of Barbados,
CARICOM, the OECS Commission and regional NGOs, including a church
alliance; (f) a consultation with United Nations agencies, bilateral agencies and
international funding institutions; (g) bilateral consultations with relev ant
ministries; and (h) two final midterm review meetings, one in Trinidad and Tobago
and the other with ministers of the various countries, jointly organized by the OECS
Commission and hosted by the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis. Following the
midterm review, colleagues from the Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados offices
came together to develop the programme for the Eastern Caribbean 2012 -2016. It
was reviewed by colleagues in the regional office as well as senior officials from the
12 countries, CARICOM and the OECS in a consultation meeting in February 2011.
Programme and component results and strategies
23. The overall goal of the multi-country programme is to contribute to realization
of the rights of all girls and boys in the Eastern Caribbea n area by ensuring accurate
and current data on their situation, fostering an enabling, child -friendly and

8

protective environment, reducing the vulnerabilities of children and their families to
social, environmental and economic risks and enhancing their p articipation. The
programme details two main results to be achieved by 2016:
(a) Equity-sensitive national policies, programmes and budget allocations
are made based on reliable, disaggregated data reflecting the actual situation of girls
and boys and their families in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Millennium Development Goals. By 2014, all countries will have fulfilled
their Convention reporting obligations and by 2016 will have taken actions to
comply with all Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child;
(b) Governments have enhanced capacities to develop comprehensive
systems of national policies, laws and institutions to ensure positive development
and protection of all boys and girls, especially those who are poor and vulnerable to
neglect, violence, exploitation and discrimination.
24. The programme will be guided by the human rights approach and the strategic
monitoring and normative programming role of UNICEF (in MICS). It will have a
gender-sensitive and equity focus to increase its impact on all children in the area.
Building on the previous programme of cooperation, it will emphasize the use of
evidence to (a) support implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child, and (b) advocate for public policy changes consistent
with international standards, as well as budget allocation and programmes focused
on children, especially the income-poor and disadvantaged.
25. Special efforts will be made to strengthen national capacity to monitor and
evaluate the situation of all children. This will also contribute to implementation of
relevant policies and programmes. Key strategies include (a) collection of data at
national and subregional levels; (b) enhancing the capacity o f potential Eastern
Caribbean Centres of Excellence in advocacy, research and analysis; (c) sharing of
experience to support scaling up of systematic approaches in ECD and education;
and (d) promoting a protective environment and disaster risk reduction, e mphasizing
poor and disadvantaged girls and boys. Innovative state models and initiatives for
possible scale-up will be supported in countries with the lowest level of gross
national income 28 for South-South sharing with other Eastern Caribbean countries
through the strategic partnership of UNICEF with CARICOM and the OECS. This
new role for UNICEF will aim to position children high on the post -Millennium
Development Goals agenda in the Eastern Caribbean.
26. Cross-cutting strategies include capacity development for rights-based
programming and results-based planning. The convening role of UNICEF will help
in building new alliances with a wide range of partners. UNICEF will advocate for
behavioural, policy and programme changes that support inclusion of the incomepoor and most disadvantaged children. The programme will contribute to and
benefit from multi-country initiatives in education, protection and data collection
and management.

__________________
28

The countries with the lowest gross national income include Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Dominica, Grenada and Saint Lucia.

9

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The multi-country programme is fully aligned with national and regional
policy frameworks, such as those of CARICOM and the OECS, Vision 20/20 and
the National Plan of Action for Children in Trinidad and Tobago. It will contribute
to achievement of several strategic priorities formulated in the United Nations
Development Assistance Frameworks (UNDAFs) of (a) Barbados and the OECS,
and (b) Trinidad and Tobago.
28. UNICEF programming in Barbados and the OECS will be harmonized with
16 resident and non-resident United Nations agencies, focusing on three priority
areas of the 2012-2016 UNDAF for Barbados and the OECS: (a) an enabling
environment for effective economic and social governance and enhanced security;
(b) social protection and poverty reduction with a focus on vuln erable groups; and
(c) capacity-building and institutional strengthening. The UNICEF programme is
also synchronized with the UNDAF 2012-2016 for Trinidad and Tobago in terms of
United Nations coherence, and it will contribute to the two joint programmes an d
results areas of social statistics and poverty reduction.
Relationship to international priorities
29. The Eastern Caribbean countries are progressing to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. The multi-country programme will focus on areas that need
support to achieve the Goals, in particular Goal 3 (gender equity), Goal 6
(HIV/AIDS and other diseases), Goal 7 (environmental sustainability) and Goal 8
(global partnership for development). Since these are compatible with the Goals, the
programme will also support realization of the principles addressed in the
Convention of the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and A World Fit for Children. The new
programme will contribute to all focus areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic
plan, 2006-2013, with an emphasis on policy advocacy and partnerships for children
(focus area 5).
Programme components
30. Evidence-based advocacy and capacity-building for equity-sensitive policy
and programme development. This component will build capacity in the subregion
to gather, disseminate and use social data for national policy decision -making. The
objective is to ensure quality social services for all, especially the poor and
disadvantaged, in line with international standards. UNICEF support will focus on:
(a) national disaggregated data on girls and boys, with special focus on disparities in
education, health and protection and evaluation of national programmes and
policies; (b) State compliance with reporting to the Committee on the Rights of the
Child; (c) State actions in response to the Committee‟s Concluding Observations
and Recommendations; and (d) national budget allocations to ensure coverage for
excluded and disadvantaged girls and boys and their families.
31. Reliable, disaggregated and high-quality data are needed to develop effective
policies and programmes that address the needs of poor and disadvantaged children
and their families. Therefore, support will be given to development of (a) national
monitoring systems for children that consistently generate data from national
surveys, and (b) an administrative sector monitoring system covering the education,
health, protection sectors. MICS will be supported for the first time in Barbados an d

10

the OECS countries, and DevInfo will be further supported in all countries as a tool
for disseminating information online. Evaluations of national programmes and
policies will be employed to improve upon them. The programme will also forge
partnerships with subregional Centres of Excellence to assist countries to generate,
manage and share data on children and to assist in creating a regional Caribbean
observatory to monitor children‟s rights.
32. The programme will seek to reinvigorate and support the commitment of
countries to implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
compliance with State party reporting.
33. The programme will closely monitor child-related budgets and expenditures, to
ensure adequate and cost-effective financing of key supportive systems (especially
in education, health and protection) for children living in poverty. The programme
aims to generate evidence to support governments in extending public services to
the most disadvantaged children and families and to strengthen the coverage,
transparency and monitoring of child-sensitive social protection programmes.
34. In order to ensure national disaggregated data on children in 12 countries, key
partnerships will be strengthened with the Ministries of Social Develop ment,
Education and Health; National Statistical Offices; CARICOM; OECS; other United
Nations agencies; and the World Bank. Partnerships will be sought with the
University of West Indies and other Caribbean learning centres and institutions for
establishment of additional (Eastern) Caribbean Centres of Excellence. The
Ministries of Social Services/National Transformation, parliamentarians and
cabinets will be pursued as partners to comply with reporting to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child and take action on its Concluding Observations. Together
with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), World Bank, Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), European
Union and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNICEF will
continue its partnership with the OECS and Ministries of Finance, Economic Affairs
and Social Services/National Transformation to work towards child -friendly budget
allocations and child-sensitive social protection.
35. The lifelong learning and protection component aims to address gaps in
access to quality and child-centred systems of ECD, education and child protection
that cater to all girls and boys in the 12 countries. UNICEF support will focus on
three priority areas: (a) access to quality ECD for children from the poorest
communities; (b) non-discriminatory and child-centred education for all primary and
secondary school children; and (c) enhanced child protection laws, policies, services
and systems. This programme will be supported by the data and evidence gathered
as part of the first component.
36. The programme will build on alternative models assisted during the 2008 -2011
programme to reach children from birth through age 5 in poor communities with
early stimulation as well as detection of developmental or cognitive delays. The
emphasis will be on ensuring national policy development, standard -setting through
the evaluation of national policies and programmes, the development and use of an
interactive curriculum for this age group, and data, monitoring and budgeting for
sustainability and national coverage.
37. The programme will also support governments to establish positive, child centred learning environments offering quality education. As such, the emphasis

11

will be on integrating the child-friendly approach (including a ban on corporal
punishment) into national education policies and then into all primary and
secondary schools. Support will also be given to education reform initiatives,
including curriculum development. The emphasis is on the psychosocial
development of children and completion of secondary school.
38. Another important priority is ensuring that children have access to effective
child protection services framed within updated laws, policies and systems. Legal
reform will focus on the status of children, children in conflict with the law,
domestic violence, care and protection. Countries will be supported to develop
action plans with financial resources, monitoring indicators and strategies to ensure
that effective social services are available to those who are vulnerable to neglect,
violence, exploitation and discrimination. This includes children living on the street,
in conflict with the law and affected by migration, as well as victims of sexual
abuse. With evidence, governments will be supported to nationalize and
institutionalize court diversion models for juveniles in conflict with the law.
39. Emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction strategies will be
mainstreamed within the various intermediate results. This effort will concentrate on
child protection and education, for which UNICEF assumes cluster leadership in
case of a humanitarian crisis.
40. Quality early childhood education will require the partnership of the Caribbean
Child Support Initiative. The heightened work in education will require the
partnership not only of ministries of education, but also the CXC, OECS,
CARICOM, Commonwealth of Learning and the World Bank. Partnerships with
parliamentarians, universities, cabinets and political parties will f urther child
protection initiatives. Stronger partnerships will be sought with the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency, Inter-Agency Network for Education in
Emergencies and Center for Partnerships to Improve Education. To engage public
opinion and ensure funding, partnerships will be sought with the media, private
sector, foundations and civil society in the spirit of corporate social responsibility.
41. The cross-sectoral component will cover cross-cutting programme costs in
Communication for Development, resource mobilization and leveraging resources
for programmatic interventions and communication.
Major partnerships
42. In support of national priorities, the multi-country programme seeks to
consolidate its partnership with key ministries and institutions in 12 countries:
Ministries of Justice, Finance, Education, Planning, Family, Youth, Social
Development, National Mobilisation, and Culture; attorneys general, statistical
departments, National Committees on the Rights of the Child, parlia ments, cabinet
officials, political parties and trade unions.
43. The multi-country programme will also strategically partner with subregional
organizations and unions such as the OECS, CARICOM, CDB, Caribbean
Broadcasting Union, Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency, CXC,
University of the West Indies and other universities, Commonwealth of Learning,
trade unions, NGOs, civil society organizations and faith-based groups.
44. Collaboration will be further sought and continued with United Nations
agencies through the UNDAF (UN-Women, UNDP, Joint United Nations

12

Programme on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Population Fund, Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean, United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Pan American
Health Organization/World Health Organization), and international and bilateral
organizations such as USAID and President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
(PEPFAR) programme, the International Organization for Migration, InterAmerican Human Rights Commission, United Kingdom Department for
International Development, Canadian International Development Agency, United
Kingdom National Committee for UNICEF, World Bank, CDB and AID
International.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. Key to this five-year multi-country programme will be the investment in solid
monitoring mechanisms to ensure evidence-based results for children. This will
involve strengthening national, subregional and office capacity in monitoring and
evaluation in order to measure qualitative, quantitative and behavioural indicators.
National child monitoring systems will be established in the 12 countries by
strengthening administrative data collection in the education and protection se ctors.
MICS will be introduced into the OECS subregion for the first time. DevInfo will be
further supported for data management, presentation and sharing.
46. The multi-country programme will pursue a more strategic approach to
evaluation by supporting government-led evaluations of innovative programmes for
children in order to meet the demand for replication and investment of successful
models. The UNICEF office will develop a strategic Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan to accompany programme implementation. Programme results will
be planned with partners through multi-country workplans. The time frame allows
for thorough midterm and end-year reviews. Programme activities will be
coordinated by the appointed ministries of governments, and collabora tion with the
OECS Commission and CARICOM will continue.

13

