E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13*

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
19 August 2014
Original: English
French
Spanish
For action

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2014
9-12 September 2014
Item 5 (b) of the provisional agenda**

Country programme document***
Ecuador
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Ecuador is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval. The Executive Board is requested to
approve the aggregate indicative budget of $3,788,000 from regular resources, subject
to the availability of funds, and $13,212,000 in other resources, subject to the
availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period 2015 to 2018.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 3 September 2014.
** E/ICEF/2014/14.
*** In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document reflects comments
made by Executive Board members on a draft version that was shared with them 12 weeks
before the 2014 second regular session of the Executive Board.

14-59464 (E)

*1459464*

200814

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

Programme rationale
1. While considerable strides have been made in reducing inequity, Ecuador, like the other
countries in the region, still faces the challenge of inequality and has shown a firm
determination to deal with the challenge through equity-oriented policies and programmes.
2. The population of Ecuador in 2014 is estimated at 16 million, with 5.9 million under
the age of 18. The Population and Housing Census 2010 shows that 7 per cent of the
population is indigenous, 7.2 per cent Afro-Ecuadorian, 7.4 per cent Montubian, 6.1 per cent
white, 71.9 per cent mestizo and 0.4 per cent ‘other’.
3. Although Ecuador is considered an upper-middle-income country, according to the
World Bank (as of December 2013), 25.6 per cent of the population is considered to be in
‘income poverty’ and 8.6 per cent in extreme poverty. When looking beyond national
averages, these indicators worsen for certain areas or populations. For example, income
poverty among indigenous and Montubian peoples is 51.1 per cent and 44.2 per cent,
respectively, much higher than the national average or the index for whites (14.3 per cent).
However, Ecuador is one of the few countries that have managed to improve equity: the Gini
coefficient stood at 0.485 as of December 2013, compared to 0.550 in 2007.
4. In terms of multidimensional poverty (which goes beyond measuring poverty only in
monetary terms to viewing it from a rights perspective, analysing child deprivation as a result
of gaps in access to rights), In its report “Social Panorama of Latin America”, published in
2013, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean indicates that, in 2011,
40.7 per cent of the children and adolescents were living in situations of multidimensional
poverty and 15.1 per cent in extreme multidimensional poverty. The Government has taken
multidimensional poverty and its inter-generational manifestations as the bases for its poverty
eradication strategy.
5. Ecuador has made significant progress in fulfilling the rights of children, adolescents
and women. With respect to the Millennium Development Goals, the national averages show
considerable progress. However, challenges remain regarding malnutrition, neonatal
mortality, maternal mortality and HIV/AIDS, as well as the reduction of inequality gaps by
ethnicity, income, gender, life cycle, place of residence and disability. For example, the latest
data on chronic malnutrition in under-fives shows a prevalence of 25.3 per cent; among
indigenous peoples this percentage rises to 42.3 per cent. On the other hand, problems of
overweight and obesity have also begun to affect Ecuadorian children reaching 8.6 per cent
in under-fives and 29.9 per cent in those aged 5-11. Among adolescents aged 15-19, the rate
of overweight and obesity was 26 per cent.
6. According to the National Information System of the National Secretariat for Planning
and Development, under-five and infant mortality rates continue to decline (having fallen
from 20.4 and 14.7 in 2005 to 13.7 and 10.1 per 1,000 live births, respectively, in 2011). The
neonatal mortality rate shows a more moderate decrease, falling from 7.5 to 6.1 per 1,000
live births between 2005 and 2011. In 2013, however, the provinces of Pichincha (the secondmost populous) had a rate of 9 per 1,000 live births, while for Loja the figure was 3.8. On the
other hand, Cotopaxi (22.4) and Chimborazo (20.7), with significant indigenous populations,
recorded the highest rates of under-five mortality. Maternal mortality shows an increase from
41 per 100,000 live births in 2005 to 70.4 in 2011. This is explained in part by an
improvement in registration. However, the Amazonian provinces of Sucumbíos and Zamora
Chinchipe have maternal mortality ratios that are more than double the national average (with
167.3 and 143.3, respectively). Adolescent pregnancy is a contributing factor in the incidence

2/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

of maternal mortality. Ecuador has one of the highest rates of adolescent pregnancy in Latin
America, as 16.9 per cent of adolescent women aged 15-19 and 0.6 per cent of those aged
12-14 are mothers. The Commitment to Child Survival: A Promise Renewed, signed by
Ecuador in 2013, constitutes an opportunity to accelerate the reduction of neonatal and
maternal mortality, with a special focus on adolescent girls and an equity perspective.
7. Of the 1.7 million children under 5, only one third attend child development or early
education programmes. Support to early childhood development a priority for State policy,
and the Ministry of Social Development Coordination and the Ministry of Economic and
Social Inclusion are focused on the national goal of guaranteeing comprehensive
development for children under 5, with a multi- and inter-sectoral perspective.
Approximately 10 per cent of children under 5 are not registered at birth, although among
Afro-Ecuadorians this figure reaches to 30 per cent, according to the Observatory of the
Rights of Children and Adolescents (ODNA) in 2010. Additionally, children under 5 are
disproportionally represented among children without parental care living in institutions.
8. The net attendance rates for basic education (for 5 to 14 years) and upper-secondary
school (for 15 to 17 years) continue to improve. In middle basic schools (for 9 to 11 years)
the rate increased from 79.6 per cent in 2010 to 82.9 per cent (84.3 per cent for girls, 81.6per
cent for boys) in 2013, while in upper basic schools (for 12 to 14 years) it increased from
72.2 per cent to 77.3 per cent (79.1 per cent for girls, 75.71 for boys) in the same period. In
upper-secondary schools, it increased from 59.4 per cent to 65.8 per cent (65.7 per cent for
girls, 65.9 per cent for boys) between 2010 and 2013. Inequalities remain, however,
especially in upper-secondary and even more when the information is disaggregated by
ethnicity and geographic location. For example, for the Montubian group the net rate of
upper-secondary school attendance was 39.4 per cent. In 2013, the rate in the lowest
economic quintile was 56 per cent, while it was 80.3 per cent for the wealthiest quintile. In
2013, more than 200,000 children and adolescents aged between 5 and 17 were estimated to
be excluded from the education system. In addition, the Situation of the Rights of Children
and Adolescents in Ecuador by the Observatory on the Rights of Children and Adolescents
(based on data from the 2010 census), shows a considerable number of over-age-for-grade
children and adolescents in the school system. Also, there were approximately 360,000 child
workers aged from 5 to 17 in 2012, representing 8.56 per cent of this age group. It increases
to 29 per cent amongst indigenous children, and 56 per cent of all child workers are associated
to hazardous activities. Although the highest child labour prevalence occurs amongst
adolescents aged 15 to 17, the group aged 5 to 14 represents 58 per cent of all working
children.
9. The persistence of social norms and behavioural patterns that contribute to violence,
including acceptance of corporal physical punishment as a form of discipline, represents an
important barrier to building protective environments that promote overall development of
children and adolescents. In schools, some 56 per cent of all sixth grade students have been
victims of some episode of violence, and 27 per cent of the children and adolescents aged 617 declared having been physically assaulted by teachers. Among those aged 5- 17, 44 per
cent were subjected to violence and abuse at home. Approximately half of the deaths of
adolescents, between 1997 and 2009, were due to accidents, homicides and self-inflicted
wounds, including suicides. In 10 provinces in the Sierra and the Amazon areas, the main
cause of death was suicide, while it was homicide in Guayas, Esmeraldas and Sucumbíos.
Adolescents in conflict with the law are provided with custodial and incipient non-custodial
measures. According to the Ministry of Justice, Human Rights and Religion in 2014, 758
adolescents aged 12-18 are detained in 11 specialized centres and another 156 benefit from
alternative measures, mainly in large urban areas. Violence has a gender dimension as well.

3/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

In general, 6 out of 10 women have been victims of gender-based violence at some point in
their lives.
10. Ecuador has reviewed and restructured the National Protection System in order to adopt
an intergenerational approach that is inclusive of various population groups. Furthermore,
relevant recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child related to
ensuring a monitoring mechanism and coordination body with a specific focus on child rights
will be addressed at both national and local levels.
11. Ecuador is susceptible to natural disasters (floods, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and
tsunamis) and other humanitarian situations. There exist capacities and mechanisms for the
prevention and mitigation of disasters at both national and local levels, and UNICEF will
continue to strengthen strategic capacities for preparation and response to emergencies.
12. Lessons learned from the programme cooperation for 2010 to 2014 include: to close the
gaps of inequality and overcome the bottlenecks and barriers impeding the full realization of
the rights of children and adolescents, an integrative approach must be adopted that is intersectoral, multisectoral and inter-functional, in line with the national planning priorities. To
this end, national partners will be able to count on the added value of UNICEF specialized
technical assistance and the promotion of exchanges of experiences, knowledge, innovation
and horizontal and triangular cooperation in the global and regional networks regarding
children and adolescents. Also, in order to achieve the expected results, all sectors of society
need to participate and show commitment. To this end, UNICEF will continue supporting
partnerships between the public and private sectors, civil society, academia and other actors.
13. This inter-sectoral, multi-sectoral and inter-functional vision is incorporated
comprehensively in the country programme, in this way responding to UNICEF’s mandate,
the agreements established in the UNDAF, and the commitments of the Paris, Accra and
Busan instruments on the effectiveness of development cooperation.
14. Both the UNDAF and the country programme of 2015-2018 are intended to be living
and dynamic instruments that respond to the country priorities and adjust to changing and
emerging situations. In this way, the programme aims to achieve a better alignment with the
national planning process and stronger national ownership, while promoting greater
coherence, efficiency and optimization of resources.

Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The overall objective of the country programme is to support national efforts oriented
to universal fulfilment of the rights of children, adolescents and women and the full
development of their capacities. Emphasis will be placed on reducing the disparities and
inequities in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and their statutory bodies,
the Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador, and the National Plan for Good Living. The
country programme is aligned with the National Strategy for the Eradication of Poverty, the
Agendas for Equality, the Sectoral Social Development Agenda and the various sectoral
strategies. It is also aligned with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF), 2015-2018, and responds to key elements of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 20142017.
16. The UNDAF proposes to contribute to national priorities, such as to increase access and
assure attendance and quality in education; reduce maternal and neonatal mortality; improve
nutrition; combat child poverty and all forms of violence and discrimination throughout the

4/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

life cycle, and promote adolescent development and participation. To achieve these goals,
with a gender perspective and taking into consideration social and cultural practices,
programmes and initiatives will take an equity approach, targeting those living in situations
of the greatest vulnerability and their specific generational deprivations (see paragraph 21).
17. Within the UNDAF, the programme focuses particularly on Results Group 2
(“Reduction of inequity gaps for cohesion, inclusion and quality of life”), and contributes to
the Direct Outcome/Results Groups 1 and 3 that include, respectively, consolidation of
citizen participation to reinforce the guarantees of rights and eradication of all forms of
discrimination and violence. From these direct outcome/ results groups, contributions will
also be made to complement Outcome 4 related to emergency preparedness and response and
risk management, and Outcome 5 related to eradication of child labour and policy dialogue
for promotion of socio-educational policies and legislation for socio-economic inclusion of
youth and adolescents.
18. With a comprehensive and inter-generational approach, the programme’s contribution
to eradication of multidimensional child poverty emerges as an overarching goal. Specific
attention is paid to three critical issues: (a) reduction of disparities in areas such as maternalchild health with emphasis on neonatal mortality, maternal mortality and malnutrition; (b)
access to and adequate services for early childhood care and development; and (c) inclusive
education of good quality for all, including preschool-aged children, and access to secondary
education for children from the age of 15, where the determining factors for age-for-grade
distortion and inequalities between urban and rural populations or among ethnic groups
constitute barriers and bottlenecks to be overcome.
19. The programme is structured in four components at the level of outcomes: (a) maternalchild health and nutrition; (b) inclusive education and equity; (c) social inclusion and
equality; and (d) protection from all forms of violence, and adolescent development.
20. Expected results will be geared toward: (a) overcoming the barriers to the universal
realization of fundamental rights, with a specific focus on the most excluded children and
adolescents, as a mechanism for overcoming poverty and discrimination; (b) ensuring equal
developmental opportunities to all children and adolescents through effective social
inclusion, social protection and participation mechanisms; and (c) changing pertinent social
norms and behaviours to generate protective environments and eradicate the causes of
violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect throughout the life cycle.
21. Strategically the programme aims to contribute towards strengthening of national
capacities for the implementation of multi-dimensional and inter-sectoral approaches to
guaranteeing realization of child rights, with an emphasis on innovative approaches in those
territories with the greatest vulnerability. Supporting national equity policies and efforts,
specific groups of children and adolescents will be prioritized, such as those living in periurban barrios and remote rural areas, the indigenous boys and girls living in the Sierra and
Amazonian regions, the Afro-Ecuadorian and indigenous in the Coast and Northern Border
areas, and children with disabilities. A special focus will be on children and adolescents,
particularly girls, in the case of specific vulnerabilities such as sexual abuse, gender-based
violence or exploitation.
22. There are four programme components, described below.
Mother-infant health and nutrition

5/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

23. In the framework of the Commitment to Child Survival: A Promise Renewed, this will
give priority to efforts toward reducing neonatal and maternal mortality, and eradicating
chronic malnutrition, especially among the indigenous peoples with the highest incidence of
chronic malnutrition and infant and maternal mortality. The main bottlenecks to be addressed
are: (a) insufficient quality and cultural relevance of health services for infant and maternal
mortality, including gender- and age-sensitive programmes, and (b) the deficient quality of
diets, in the case of malnutrition. Therefore, the programme will contribute mainly to
strengthening capacities of health workers and promotion of breastfeeding and quality
complementary feeding, particularly for children under 2. This will include the use of
communication for development strategies and education to change harmful behaviour and
practices. Similarly, overweight and obesity will be addressed through awareness-raising and
promotion of healthy nutritional practices. In this regard the programme will support national
multisectoral policies and an adolescent-friendly approach in health policies and services, for
instance, those focused on preventing adolescent pregnancy.
Inclusive education and equity
24. Under the framework of the global strategy of Education for All and the regional
strategy on Educative Goals 2021, this will contribute to the re-orientation of educational
services and exchange of experiences and good practices to improve the quality of national
education and increase opportunities for access and retention, in the national framework of
the Organic Law on Intercultural Education. It will also contribute to the following goals: (a)
identify and design extracurricular activities to help reinforce learning results in the
classroom and other educational spaces; (b) develop learning and advocacy materials that
link school to the family and promote beneficial changes in socio-cultural patterns to enable
the overall development of children and adolescents; and (c) develop capacities in the areas
of human rights and gender equality among education personnel. Specific strategies will be
adopted to target out-of-school adolescents through policy dialogue and advocacy, focusing
on those excluded from the education system, such as adolescent parents and young workers,
and also adolescents who are at risk of exclusion for performance underachievement.
25. In the area of comprehensive early childhood development, the programme will support
governmental actions to adopt inter-sectoral models, methods and tools for effective
management of early childhood development, especially regarding follow-up and
monitoring; preparation of quality standards for services; training through innovative
modalities; and greater use of technology and mass communication media.
Social inclusion and equality
26. This component and its contribution to eradication of multidimensional child poverty
will support national policies, agendas and strategies in matters of inter-generational equality,
eradication of poverty, and social protection. It will advocate greater public spending at both
national and local levels, as well as specific emphasis on children and adolescents, especially
the marginalized. Special attention will be paid to following up on the recommendations
related to the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including
advocacy for ratification of its third Optional Protocol, and that of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The component also will
contribute towards generation, analysis and use of disaggregated data, including by sex, on
social inclusion, multidimensional child poverty and discrimination, to advocate for the
“Good Living” of children and adolescents, with an equity approach. Support will be
provided for national efforts to guarantee a multisectoral and adolescent-friendly approach

6/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

in policies and services. Specific strategies related to promoting adolescent social inclusion
will include creation of opportunities for their participation in dialogue and decision-making
processes related to the realization of their rights and policy priorities, such as education,
health, culture, leisure, sports, and information and communication technologies.
Protection from violence, and adolescent development
27. This component will support national policies oriented to preventing and eradicating all
forms of violence, including gender-based violence, abuse and exploitation of children and
adolescents. The programmatic strategies will focus on strengthening the national systems,
mechanisms and capacities for generating protective environments for children and
adolescents. It will also devote efforts to an effective and multisectoral management of
addressing violence throughout the life cycle in a comprehensive manner that is sensitive to
gender, age and culture. The central approach of the protection element will be the change of
socio-cultural patterns and other barriers that promote and reproduce violence. Special
attention will be paid to adolescent development, since most rights violations related to
violence disproportionally affect adolescents and their overall development. The different
forms of violence will be addressed holistically, in accordance with the constitutional
precepts and the guidelines deriving from the National Plan for Good Living and the
UNDAF.
28. Specific protection strategies related to adolescents will include: (a) follow-up and
support of current normative and institutional changes within the juvenile justice system,
particularly those related to implementation and monitoring of alternative custodial
measures; (b) generate knowledge and awareness regarding violent deaths of adolescents,
such as homicides, suicides and accidents, advocating for an age-specific and multisectoral
approach to policies aimed at reducing violent deaths.
29. Elements related to emergency preparedness and response and disaster risk reduction
will be integrated into each of the four programme components with innovative modalities
of institutionalization and standardization, awareness-raising, formal and non-formal
learning, promoting multisectoral and inter-agency partnerships, and the participation of
children and adolescents.
Cross-sectoral
30. This will support all activities related to programme management, including support
and technical assistance for the four programmatic components in areas such as
communication for development, monitoring and evaluation, and social and resource
mobilization for child rights.

Strategies
31. In general, the programme and its strategies are an interdependent and interrelated set
of efforts aligned with national priorities and approaches, the UNDAF and the UNICEF
Strategic Plan. By favouring a multisectoral and inter-sectoral approach over a sectoral one,
the programme is conceived as an integrated whole, and not as isolated components.
32. Given the programme’s scope and resources, the interventions under the four
programmatic components seek to influence actions at both national and subnational levels,

7/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

with an emphasis on equity and the areas and specific groups in situations of high risk and
vulnerability.
33. The set of strategies applied by the country programme will ensure a human rightsbased approach and gender equality perspective and include: (a) development of human talent
in aspects of institutional management that call for implementation of comprehensive and
inter-sectoral interventions at the national and subnational levels for reduction of gaps in
income and other measures of inequality. Through capacity development, the programme
aims to contribute – at the levels of individuals, families, communities and society as a whole
– towards construction and development of environments protective of child rights, and
design and implementation of mechanisms for promoting the resilience of adolescents in
these environments, facilitating the construction of their future life plans. (b) generation of
knowledge and evidence for advocacy and policy dialogue in support of the design of public
policies, implementation of strategies and decision-making based on up-to-date data and
other reliable information, and identification of and follow-up on the barriers and bottlenecks
impeding the guarantee of child and adolescent rights; (c) promotion of public, private and
inter-agency partnerships to strengthen collaboration, inter-sectoral and cross-cutting
integration among different social actors, as well as promotion of centres of excellence, in
order to facilitate monitoring and analysis of trends in the exercise of rights, Corporate Social
Responsibility and mobilization of support and resources in favour of the rights of children
and adolescents; (d) South-South and triangular cooperation in order to promote learning and
the facilitation and exchange of good practices; and (e) Communication for Development,
which is a fundamental strategy to facilitate inter-generational dialogue and to contribute
toward changing socio-cultural patterns associated with violence and other behaviours
impacting the realization of the rights of children and adolescents.
34. Other key strategies are the identification and promotion of innovations in
programming, as well as of integration and inter-sectoral links to support the holistic
approach.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Maternal-infant health and nutrition

841

1 650

2 491

Inclusive education

723

3 200

3 923

Social inclusion and equality

775

2 400

3 175

1 045

2 662

3 707

404

3 300

3 704

3 788

13 212

17 000

Protection from violence, and adolescent
development
Cross-sectoral
Total

Programme and risk management
35. Management of the programme is results-based, in accordance with the corresponding
government emphasis, as stipulated in the UNDAF. Its approach facilitates inter-agency

8/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

coordination through the mechanism of UNDAF Results Groups for planning and
programming, integration of sectors and activities, and participatory planning processes
between the Government and multilateral cooperation actors of the United Nations System.
On the Government side, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs through the Technical Secretariat
for International Cooperation, the National Development Planning Secretariat , the Ministry
of Social Development Coordination and various line ministries will be the key partners in
the planning and management processes. This arrangement will ensure a full alignment with
national priorities and challenges, as requested by Member States in the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review (QCPR) of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system.
36. The integration and rationalization of resources will be further supported by the use of
common services such as the United Nations House, and UNICEF will continue to use the
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) as the mechanism for management of
programme financial resources.
37. In accordance with the UNDAF results groups modality, all programmatic components
are expected to have a very close articulation among responsible and contributing United
Nations agencies within the various results/direct effects groups. For example, UNICEF will
coordinate closely with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Food Programme (WFP) in early childhood,
especially regarding maternal and neonatal mortality and the eradication of malnutrition.
UNICEF will work with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to ensure effective coordination of gender-specific
elements of the programme and also to ensure that a gender-sensitive approach is applied.
On the Northern Border, UNICEF will continue to work within the framework of the interagency programme with UNHCR, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
PAHO, UNFPA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). With UNDP, UNESCO and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCHR), UNICEF will work in the areas of rights,
cultural identity and bilingual inter-cultural education of the indigenous peoples. HIV/AIDS
issues will be coordinated together with PAHO, UNFPA and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
38. UNICEF will prioritize local fundraising through individual donors, which it will
complement with approaches to external donors. Corporate Social Responsibility will be
promoted from the perspective of co-responsibility, with the purpose of orienting individual
commitment and resources towards investment in policies for children and adolescents, and
of generating and implementing practices that promote the rights of children and adolescents
in the country, and regionally and globally.
39. The identification of areas for multi-country and/or subregional collaboration will be
explored for bringing additional resources to the programme and fostering South-South,
horizontal and triangular cooperation.
40. This country programme document outlines UNICEF contributions to national results
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures.

9/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

Monitoring and evaluation
41. Systematic analysis and monitoring of the rights of children is an integrated and
essential element of the country programme. It will be carried out in close collaboration with
the existing structures and institutions, such as the National Institute of Statistics and
Censuses (INEC), the National Secretariat of Planning and Development (SENPLADES),
and centres of excellence. Findings from situation analyses and monitoring will generate
inputs for action and dialogue to support the design of polices, as well as develop capacities
for observance of rights at the subnational and territorial levels.
42. Permanent and systematic monitoring of the situation of children, the evolution of
inequality gaps, and bottlenecks and barriers impeding the full exercise of the rights of
children and adolescents will be key aspects in the monitoring and evaluation approach. In
the framework of the Monitoring Results for Equity System (MoRES), UNICEF will
collaborate with the national statistics systems in order to improve the generation of quality
and disaggregated data to inform, among other areas, determinant analysis in each of the key
areas of support in this programme.
43. As a result of the lessons learned from review exercises, particular attention will be
placed on the definition of indicators, baselines and goals for following the progress and
results of the interventions established for the programme. Also, follow-up and collaboration
in the development of national capacities for following up on the recommendations, both of
the Universal Periodic Review and the Committee on the Rights of the Child will be
implemented.
44. The Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan and annual planning will serve to
identify the mechanisms and instruments, studies, surveys and evaluations to be carried out
and will be in line with the UNDAF. Together with the Inter-agency Monitoring and
Evaluation group, UNICEF will monitor the UNDAF and its results, including the
contribution of UNICEF to them. In addition, UNICEF will contribute to strengthening the
inter-agency work on national monitoring and evaluation. Two major evaluations are
planned: one on the country programme, 2015-2018, and the other on national interventions
to reduce violence against children and adolescents.
45. In close collaboration with the Technical Secretariat for International Cooperation,
SENPLADES and the Ministry for Social Development Coordination, regular reviews of the
programme will be carried out in order to identify progress and constraints and introduce any
necessary adjustments.

10/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

Annex
Results and resources framework
Ecuador-UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2015-2018
Component 1. Maternal-infant health and nutrition
Relevant articles in the Convention on the Rights of the Child: 3, 6, 24, 25.
National priority: National Plan For Good Living. Objective 3: Guarantee the quality of life of the population.
Millennium Development Goals: 1: Eradicate poverty and hunger. 4: Reduce child mortality. 5: Improve maternal health.
UNDAF results associated with UNICEF: Direct Effect #2: By 2018, (the United Nations) has contributed to strengthening the national and local
institutional capacities within their competencies and those of the citizenry, in accordance with the guidelines for the involved sectors, to reduce the inequity
gaps in the enjoyment of the rights to health, education, habitat and housing, water and sanitation, food, a healthy environment and comprehensive social
protection.
Results indicators that measure change and include UNICEF contribution: 1. Number of public policy instruments developed and/or implemented at the
national and local level in the framework of their territorial circumscription and sphere of competence that contribute to the State’s institutional strategies to
reduce the inequity gaps, in accordance with the Sectoral Social Development Agenda.
Results Related to the UNICEF Strategic Plan: Outcome 1, output: b. Outcome 4, outputs: a and c
UNICEF results
(outcomes)

Key progress indicators,
baselines and goals

Means of
verification

Indicative outputs of the
country programme

Main associates,
partnership
frameworks

By end-2018,
children,
adolescents and
mothers, especially
in the territories in
situations of
greatest
vulnerability, enjoy

Percentage of live births
attended by a skilled health
personnel
Baseline: TBD
Goal: TBD

INEC–
National Health
and Nutrition
Survey

By 2018, families have
increased knowledge and
exercise practices to improve
the nutrition of children and
adolescents.

Ministry of Public
Health,
Ministry of Social
Development
Coordination,
Ministry of Economic
and Social Inclusion,
PAHO.

Percentage of women
attended at least four times

INEC –
Statistical
Yearbook on

Indicative resources by
country programme result
(in millions of US$):
Regular resources (RR);
Other resources (OR) 1
RR
0.8

OR
1.7

Total
2.5

1.
11

Figures are rounded to the nearest tenth.

11/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

greater
opportunities and
equality in the use
of high-impact
maternal and child
health interventions
and use of
nutritional support
and improved
nutrition and care
practices for
children and
adolescents.

during their pregnancy by
Vital Statistics,
any provider (skilled or
Births and
unskilled) for reasons related Deaths
to the pregnancy
Baseline: TBD
Goal: TBD

By 2018, the institutions
have more evidence for
reduction of maternal and
child mortality, with rights
and gender approaches.

Ministry of Public
Health, Ministry of
Economic and Social
Inclusion, Ministry of
Social Development
Coordination, PAHO,
UNFPA.

Exclusive breastfeeding rate
among children 0-5 months
old
Baseline: 43.8 per cent
(2012)
Goal: 64 per cent (2018)

Total: Maternal-infant health and nutrition component

0.8

1.7

2.5

Component 2. Inclusive education and equity
Relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child: 28, 29 and 32.
National priority: National Plan for Good Living. Objective 2: Promote equality, cohesion, inclusion and social and territorial equity, amid diversity.
Millennium Development Goals: 2: Achieve universal basic education.
UNDAF results associated with UNICEF: Direct effect #2: By 2018, the Programme has contributed to the strengthening of national and local capacities,
within their competencies and those of the citizenry, according to the guidelines of the involved sectors to reduce the inequity gaps in the enjoyment of the
rights to health, education, habitat and housing, water and sanitation,, food, a healthy environment and comprehensive social protection.
Results indicators that measure change and include UNICEF contribution: 1. Number of public policy instruments developed and/or implemented at the
national and local level, and in their territorial jurisdiction and scope of competence, that contribute to the State’s institutional strategies for the reduction of
inequity gaps, in accordance with the Sectoral Social Development Agenda.
Results related to the UNICEF Strategic Plan: Outcome 5, outputs: a, b and c.
UNICEF results

12/16

Key progress indicators,
baselines and goals

Means of
verification

Indicative outputs of the
country programme

Main associates,
partnership
frameworks

Indicative resources by
country programme result

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

By end-2018,
children and
adolescents – with
special emphasis on
those in the most
vulnerable zones –
enjoy greater
opportunities for the
exercise of their
rights to education
with quality,
relevance and good
treatment of
students.

Rate of attendance in middle
basic education (ages 9-11)
and upper basic education
(ages 12-14)
Baseline:
 Middle basic 83.29
per cent (2012)
 Upper basic: 74.5
per cent (2012)
Goal:
 Middle basic: 95 per
cent (2018)
 Upper basic: 95 per
cent (2018)
Net upper-secondary
attendance rate
Baseline: 63.9 (2012)
Goal: 80 per cent (2018)

INEC –
National
Survey of
Employment,
Unemployment
and Underemployment

By end-2018, public
institutions provides
improved services related to
comprehensive child
development based on
innovative management
methodologies by 2018.

Ministry of Economic
and Social Inclusion,
Ministry of Education,
Ministry of Social
Development
Coordination,
UNESCO

By end-2018, the institutions,
families and other actors
have capacities, evidence and
exchange of experiences for
inclusion, retention, quality,
gender sensitivity and good
treatment in education.

Ministry of
Knowledge and
Human Talent
Coordination,
Ministry of Education

RR
0.7

OR
3.2

Total
3.9

0.7

3.2

3.9

Net upper-secondary
attendance rate among
children in the poorest
economic quintile
Baseline: 53.8 per cent
(2012)
Goal: TBD
Total: Inclusive education and equity component

Component 3. Social inclusion and equality
Relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child: 2, 3, 4, 26.
National priority: National Plan for Good Living. Objective 2: Foster equality, cohesion, inclusion and social and territorial equity, amid diversity.
Millennium Development Goals: 1: Eradicate poverty and hunger.

13/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

UNDAF results associated with UNICEF: Direct effect #2: By 2018, the Programme has contributed to strengthening national and local institutional
capacities, within its competencies and those of the citizenry, according to the guidelines of the involved sectors, to reduce the inequity gaps in the enjoyment
of the rights to health, education, habitat and housing, water and sanitation, food, a healthy environment and comprehensive social protection.
Results indicators that measure the change and include UNICEF contribution: 1. Number of public policy instruments developed and/or implemented
at the national and local level within their territorial jurisdiction and sphere of competency, which contribute to the State’s institutional strategies for reducing
the inequity gaps, in accordance with the Social Sectorial Development Agenda.
Results related to the UNICEF Strategic Plan: Outcome 7, outputs: b and c
UNICEF results

Key progress indicators,
baselines and goals

Means of
verification

Indicative outputs of the
country programme

Main associates,
partnership
frameworks

By end-2018, boys
and girls and
adolescents,
especially those in
situations of the
greatest
vulnerability, enjoy
greater
opportunities, social
inclusion and
quality in the
exercise of their
rights without
gender
discrimination
through an
improved policy
environment and
systems, guided by
improved
knowledge and data.

Number of children covered
by social protection systems
Baseline: TBD
Goal: TBD

INEC –
National
Survey of
Employment,
Unemployment
and Underemployment

By end-2018, Ecuador has
improved information,
technical exchanges and
evidence related to social
protection and the reduction
of poverty, especially
multidimensional child
poverty, with a gender
perspective.

National Secretariat of
Planning and
Development, Ministry
of Economic and
Social Inclusion,
Ministry of Social
Development
Coordination,
Technical Secretariat
for the Eradication of
Poverty, INEC,
Facultad
Latinoamericana de
Ciencias Sociales,
Ecuador Social
Observatory
Foundation

14/16

Social Budget
Monitoring
Publications.

Indicative resources by
country programme result

RR
0.8

OR
2.4

Total
3.2

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

Total: Social inclusion and equality component

0.8

2.4

3.2

Component 4. Protection from violence, and Adolescent development
Relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child: 3, 12, 19, 27, 31, 32, 37 and 40.
National priority: National Plan for Good Living. Objective 2: Foster equality, cohesion, inclusion and social and geographic equity, amid diversity.
Objective 4: Strengthen the capacities and potentialities of the citizenry.
Objective 6: Consolidate the transformation of justice and strengthen comprehensive security, with strict respect for human rights.
Millennium Development Goals: 1: Eradicate poverty and hunger. 3: Promote equality between the sexes and the empowerment of women. 5. Improve
maternal health.
UNDAF results associated with UNICEF: Direct effect #3: By 2018, the Programme has contributed to strengthening institutional and citizen capacities to
promote gender equality and the eradication of all forms of discrimination and violence based on gender, ethnicity, disability, age and human mobility
situation.
Results indicators that measure change and include UNICEF contribution: 2. Number of public institutions at the national and local level that, within
their competencies, implement comprehensive strategies based on constitutional and international standards, for changes in knowledge, attitudes and practices
that reproduce violence and discrimination.
Results related to the UNICEF Strategic Plan: Outcome 6, outputs a, b and c.
UNICEF results

Key Progress Indicators,
baselines and goals

Means of
verification

Indicative outputs of the
country programme

Main associates,
partnership
frameworks

By end-2018
adolescents and
children benefit
from changes of
socio-cultural
patterns, protective
environments, and
multi-sectoral
policies that
integrate a
comprehensive

Percentage of children and
adolescents aged 5-17
receiving violent or
punishing treatment from
their teachers.
Baseline: 30 per cent (2010)
(33 per cent for boys, 28 for
girls); 27 per cent (2004); 20
per cent (2000).
Goal: reverse a rising
tendency

ODNA –
Survey by the
Social
Observatory of
Ecuador

By end 2018, Ecuador has
strengthened channels and
spaces for adolescent
participation and has
improved adolescent
development policies,
including friendly services
with specific focus on
violence prevention.

Ministry of Economic
and Social Inclusion,
Ministry of Social
Development
Coordination,
Ministry of Justice,
Ministry of Labour,
Legislative branch,
Judiciary branch,
UNFPA, UN-Women,
OHCHR

Sectorial
reports
Governmental
policies
developed

Indicative resources by
country programme result
RR
1.0

OR
2.7

Total
3.7

15/16

E/ICEF/2014/P/L.13

approach to
adolescent
development,
participation and
protection from
violence, including
gender-based
violence.

Percentage of children and
adolescents between 5 and 17
receiving violent treatment
from their parents.
Baseline: 44 per cent (2010)
(45 per cent for boys, 42 per
cent for girls); 44 per cent
(2004); 35 per cent (2000).
Goal: reverse the rising
tendency

Information
systems
Sectorial
reports

By 2018, policymakers,
justice actors, social
organizations, communities
and families are equipped
with knowledge, capacities,
INEC –
systems and mechanisms to
National
provide protective
Survey on
environments for children
Employment,
and adolescents, with a
Unemployment gender perspective.
and UnderEmployment

Ministry of Economic
and Social Inclusion,
Ministry of Social
Development
Coordination,
Ministry of Justice,
Ministry of Labour,
Legislative Branch,
UNFPA, UN-Women,
OHCHR

Violent deaths in adolescents
and their causes incorporated
into the public agenda
Baseline: No
Goal: Yes
Percentage of children 5-14
involved in child labour
Baseline: 3.2 per cent (2012)
Goal: 0 per cent (2018)
Total: Protection from violence, and adolescent development component

_______

16/16

1.0

2.7

3.7

