E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
El Salvador
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for El Salvador is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $4,795,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $8,000,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

Programme rationale
1. The children of El Salvador, some 2.2 million in all, represent 35 per cent of the
population of approximately 6.3 million. 1 Two out of every ten children are under the age of
5, while four out of every ten are adolescents. Around six out of every ten children live in
urban areas. Children make up a sizeable proportion of the more than 3 million Salvadorans
who live outside the country as a result of intense migration patterns.
2. Compared to two decades ago, Salvadoran children today enjoy more opportunities for
their survival, development and protection. The under-five mortality rate has decreased by
73 per cent; more children attend and complete primary school; and the proportion of poor
households has steadily decreased. Children enjoy a legal, policy and programmatic
framework intended to protect their rights, through the Law for the Integral Protection of
Children and Adolescents (LEPINA) and the Youth Law. El Salvador celebrated, in 2015,
20 years of reforms to the juvenile justice system.
3. Fiscal pressures, low economic growth, violence, inequities and certain social norms
challenge the sustainability of gains for children. The Government of El Salvador positions
human well-being at the centre of its 2014-2019 Five Year Development Plan (NDP),2 with
its three priorities: sustainable economic growth; inclusive education and social equity; and
citizen security, with children as key beneficiaries. Therefore, the government’s strategies
seek to improve future outcomes and opportunities for children.
4. Over the past five years, the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) has grown by 1.8
per cent on average, and 2.2 per cent growth is projected for 2015, the lowest of Central
America. Public sector debt as a proportion of GDP is projected to increase from 42.4 per
cent (2008) to 62.4 per cent (2014).3 Nonetheless, per capita investment in children stands
at $434, a level above that of several countries in Central America. Public sector spending
has increased from 12.8 per cent (2008) to 14.8 per cent (2012) of GDP, in part because of
important health and education social protection programmes.4 Monetary poverty affects 44
per cent of children, compared to 35 per cent of adults.5 Approximately 61 per cent of all
children suffer multidimensional poverty (deprived of at least one of their rights), and the
majority of them are in rural areas (58 per cent).6 Approximately 70 per cent of poor children
live in households without social protection.7
5. El Salvador has one of the lowest child mortality rates in Central America, resulting
from immunization and infectious diseases control programmes. However, neonatal
mortality accounts for 59 per cent of all deaths of children under age one, principally due to
low birthweight and congenital anomalies. 8 Disparities exist according to geographical
residence, place of health care service, income and educational status of women: whereas the

1

Multiple Purpose Household Survey (EHPM), 2013.
National Development Plan, 2014-2019 (PQD).
3
Central Reserve Bank and Ministry of Finance, 2015.
4
El Salvador: Medición del gasto público en niñez y adolescencia, 2011. (Government of El
Salvador/UNICEF/Central American Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2014).
5
EHPM, 2013.
6
La niñez y la adolescencia en El Salvador frente a sus garantías sociales de ciudadanía. Government of El
Salvador/UNICEF, 2014).
7
Protección social de la niñez y la adolescencia en El Salvador (Government of El Salvador/UNICEF, 2014).
8
Ministry of Health, 2014.
2

2/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

national child mortality rate is 20 deaths per 1,000 live births, it jumps to 29 deaths in the
lowest economic quintile and to 43 deaths when mothers have little education. 9
6. The maternal mortality ratio fell from 56 (2009) to 38 deaths (2013) per 100,000 live
births, but 41 per cent of these deaths is concentrated among girls, adolescents and young
women aged 10–24. Twenty-five per cent of all maternal deaths are suicides, 75 per cent of
which were committed by girls, adolescents and young women. 10 Underscoring this
challenge are inadequate health-seeking behaviours among teen mothers, who account for 23
per cent of all pregnancies.
7. Chronic malnutrition is a barrier to child development, with profound inequities.
Whereas 14 per cent of all children under the age 5 suffer from stunting, the percentage
increases to 24 in the lowest quintile and to 25 when the mother has little education.11
8. A total of 29,799 cases of HIV have been reported since 1984, 62 per cent of which
were among men and 38 per cent among women. Prevention of mother-to-child transmission
accounts for less than 1 per cent of all new HIV cases.12
9. Important strides have been made in the public education system. Early childhood
education has been a public policy priority since 2009, responding to low enrolment rates:
under 2 per cent for children aged 0-3 and 56 per cent for children aged 4-6. Official data
indicate that 57 per cent of children who are not enrolled in early childhood education live in
the country’s 120 poorest municipalities (out of 262).13 Approximately 53 per cent of children
from rural areas attend pre-primary school, compared to 64.7 per cent in urban areas.
10. The net enrolment rate in primary school increased from 86 per cent (2000) to 93 per
cent (2013), with gender parity. Enrolling and retaining adolescents in secondary school
represent enormous challenges. Although the net enrolment rate in lower- and uppersecondary levels increased between 2000 and 2013 from 43 per cent to 65 per cent, and from
27 per cent to 38 per cent, respectively, a large number of adolescents still have never reached
or completed secondary school.14 For example, fewer children and adolescents from the
lower quintile (26.4 per cent) attend school than those in the upper quintile (42.8 per cent).
More girls attend secondary school (40.9 per cent) than boys (37.2 per cent), reflecting a
critical gender issue.15
11. In 2014, 6 per cent of the entire student population left school, and 86 per cent of schools
reported student dropout. This was principally due to violence, including gender-based
violence, in and around schools: some 27 per cent of schools reported gang activity as a
reason students left school, and 65 per cent and 47 per cent indicated students moved their
residence or migrated, respectively, with both actions indirectly associated with violence. 16
12. Government spending on education averaged 3.14 per cent of GDP since 1995, which
is below the regional average of 5.2 per cent. Spending is concentrated on recurrent
expenditures such as salaries, and not enough is invested in improving quality or

9

Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2014.
Ministry of Health, 2013, 2014.
11
MICS, 2014.
12
Ministry of Health, 2014.
13
Ministry of Education, School Census Data, 2000-2013.
14
Educación de El Salvador en cifras (Ministry of Education, 2014; NDP).
15
EHPM, 2013.
16
Ministry of Education, 2014.
10

3/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

infrastructure.17 The quality of education is affected by the relatively low academic
qualifications of teachers, with fewer than 13 per cent possessing an advanced degree in
education, and the rest having only some technical qualifications.18
13. The most significant barrier to child and adolescent well-being is violence in their
homes, communities and schools. El Salvador has the highest global child homicide rate.
Between 2005 and 2013, a total of 6,300 child homicides were reported, with 89 per cent of
the victims boys aged 15-19. More than 60 per cent of all child deaths are intentional. Eighty
per cent of homicides are committed by adults. Bullying is another challenge, reported by 42
per cent of sixth-grade children, as is abuse and murder of girls and women. Close to 71 per
cent of all cases of female sexual abuse were reported against girls, and El Salvador has
reportedly the highest femicide rate in the world.19
14. Aggravating the situation of violence against children is the limited resolution capacity
of the judicial system. Of 121,755 crimes committed in 2013-2014, 89 per cent (107,962)
were taken to court, and 36,592 of these were closed, leaving a total of 71,370 cases still
open.20
15. Disintegrated family structures due to migration, poverty and violence negatively
impact the development of children. An estimated 37 per cent of children live without their
mother, father or both parents, while 15 per cent of children live in households where at least
one family member has migrated.21 Early-childhood stimulation practices are inadequate and
gender-differentiated: some 40 per cent of mothers play with their children, compared to only
8 per cent of fathers, whilst fewer than 20 per cent of children live in households that have
three or more children´s books. 22 Insufficient early childhood services and inadequate
parental practices leave children reaching primary school with deficient literacy and
numeracy skills.
16. Close to 10,000 unaccompanied Salvadoran migrating children were detained in and
returned from the United States and Mexico in 2014, compared to approximately 6,000 in the
previous year. The principal causes of migration were seeking family reunification, escaping
from violence and lack of educational, vocational and employment opportunities for
adolescents. Accidents, sexual assault (especially of girls), child trafficking and death are
common during the migratory route.23
17. Census data indicate that 1.6 per cent of children have some form of disability, and
probably underestimate the figure, given the stigma and discrimination associated with this
condition. Children with disabilities in El Salvador suffer more violence, sexual abuse and
exclusion from health, education and protection services than children without disabilities. 24
18. El Salvador is highly vulnerable to disasters, especially earthquakes, tropical storms
and volcanic eruptions, potentially affecting 95 per cent of the population. To date, many

17

El financiamiento de la Educación en El Salvador (Ministry of Education/Fundación Innovaciones Educativas
Centroamericanas/UNICEF, 2013).
18
Ministry of Education, 2014.
19
Atlas de la violencia en El Salvador, 2005-2014 (Fundación Dr. Guillermo Manuel Ungo, 2014); Hidden in
Plain Sight (UNICEF, 2014); the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
2014; General Prosecutor’s Office (GPO), 2013-2014.
20
GPO.
21
EHPM, 2013.
22
MICS 2014.
23
Official data from the Governments of El Salvador and the United States, 2014.
24
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2013.

4/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

families and communities are still recovering from two devastating earthquakes in 2001,
while a powerful tropical depression in 2011 affected the entire country, generating losses of
$840 million, or 4 per cent of GDP. Advances have been made to prioritize children and
their families affected by emergencies. 25
19. The right to participation of children and adolescents has been promoted through
consultations for the post-2015 agenda, the NDP and the National Policy on the Integral
Protection of Children and Adolescents, as well as the establishment of a Children’s
Consultative Committee to advise the National Council for Children and Adolescents
(CONNA). El Salvador ratified the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on a
Communications procedure.
20. The Committee on the Rights of the Child has recommended the reversal of the high
vulnerability children and adolescents experience, especially through neonatal mortality,
chronic malnutrition, adolescent pregnancy, violence and school dropout and poor enrolment.
The Committee also urged El Salvador to address systemic issues such as certain social and
cultural norms, integration of different protection systems and prioritizing children in public
policies and budgets. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
urged the State to adopt a strategy to eliminate sexist stereotypes in schools and to address
violence against women and girls.
21. The UNICEF situation analysis of children and the midterm review confirm three
lessons learned: (a) development and protection gains are not reaching all children living in
high vulnerability with basic social services; (b) the principal duty-bearers for the protection
of children – parents, communities and school staff – are the main perpetrators of violence
against children; and (c) a profound change is required in the way Salvadorans treat their
children and hold government accountable for developing programmes that uphold the rights
of all children. UNICEF’s comparative advantages in capacity development, evidence
generation, policy dialogue, partnerships, advocacy and South-South cooperation should
continue, focusing on improving the coverage, quality and efficiency of services to reduce
inequities that affect the most disadvantaged children. UNICEF should also foster active
citizenship participation to position children at the heart of policy development.

Programme priorities and partnerships
22. The overall objective of the country programme is to support national efforts for the
universal realization of children’s rights. Special attention will be given to reducing
inequities, particularly among the most disadvantaged children and adolescents, and the
progressive elimination of the barriers faced in exercizing their rights. Converting inequities
into opportunities for children is central to the programme, by ensuring that the home,
community and school fully nurture and protect their children. The country programme
supports the NDP and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF),
and is in alignment with UNICEF’s Strategic Plan 2014-2017. As a Delivering as One
country, the programme seeks complementarities with other United Nations agencies to
enhance the efficiency of interventions.
23. The programme will respond to the key threats to children’s rights through four
components: (a) children protected from violence; (b) inclusive education; (c) healthy start
in life; and (d) social inclusion and children’s rights monitoring. The programme contributes

25

ECLAC, 2011.

5/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

to these outcomes by supporting the removal of those barriers that affect the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable, such as children living in poverty, rural areas and communities
affected by violence, who lack social protection and who live in single-parent homes, with a
gender perspective. Due attention will be given to migrant and indigenous children, and those
with disabilities, through partnerships with specialized organizations. Strategic efforts will
be intensified to strengthen national capacities for the realization of children’s rights and to
modify social norms and behaviours to provide protective environments for children.
Children and adolescents will be supported to participate in the design, monitoring, and
implementation of public policies. The programme will continue strengthening its knowledge
management strategy through the production of evidence on the situation of children to
inform policy, programme and budget formulation. The Gender Action Plan will focus on
gender-based violence, adolescent pregnancy and gender-sensitive parenting in early
childhood. Resilience against natural disasters is built into all components. Public advocacy,
social mobilization and communication for development will support the programme.
24. The programme will address barriers in the legal framework, limited institutional
coordination, insufficient financial resources and weak monitoring and evaluation. The
programme will assist government partners to reach the most excluded children, strengthen
skills of local service providers and improve the integral protection system. Demand barriers
include low educational levels of caregivers, social norms that hinder child care practices and
insufficient participation of children and adolescents in policy processes.
Children protected from violence
25. This component will improve access to child protection systems at the national and
subnational levels and enable counterparts with capacity to protect children and adolescents
from violence and ensure restitution of their rights, as well as reinsertion of adolescents in
conflict with the law. The overall objective is to ensure a life free from violence, abuse,
exploitation and neglect, with a particular focus on gender-based violence. Special attention
will be placed on girls vulnerable to sexual abuse and to boys prone to gang-related violence,
living in the most violent communities.
26. An important barrier to an improved child protection system is the limited interinstitutional coordination. UNICEF will continue supporting the consolidation and
improvement of coordination mechanisms at various levels (geographic and between
institutions), and also assist CONNA in the development and implementation of mechanisms
that facilitate coordination and evaluation of efforts across institutions as well as between the
national and community levels to increase children´s access to preventive and response
services. CONNA, line ministries, institutions, authorities at the subnational level, and civil
society organizations (CSOs) related to the integral protection of children and adolescents
are key partners.
27. The implementation of the child protection system at the local level is limited due to
insufficient resources, representing an important barrier to enhanced family- and communitybased child protection. UNICEF will support selected municipalities to design and
implement inter-sectoral strategies and programmes for the prevention of violence against
children and adolescents, including gender-based violence and provision of gender-sensitive
services. The aim is to document replicable models that yield positive results for children
for potential replication nationally.
28. Another barrier is the shortage of specialized programmes to attend to highly vulnerable
children and adolescents, such as those in contact and conflict with the law, victims of

6/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

violence, unaccompanied child migrants, pregnant adolescents and children and adolescents
at risk of gang conscription. UNICEF will support national authorities to strengthen such
specialized programmes, in coordination with CONNA, the Salvadoran Institute for the
Integral Development of Children and Adolescents (ISNA), the Ministries of Justice and
Public Security, Health and Education, the Vice-Ministry of Salvadorans Abroad and CSOs.
29. Violence and fear are a daily reality for most Salvadoran children, limiting the exercise
of their rights and the development of their full potential. This component envisages
interventions associated with behavioural change and social mobilization, by focusing on
providing children, adolescents, their families and community leaders with mechanisms to
actively participate in the creation of safe environments through a nationally replicable
gender-sensitive model. It will also support the expansion of the ¿No te Indigna? (Doesn’t
it outrage you?) campaign, based on the global #END Violence against Children campaign,
to highlight, with a gender focus, violence against children in the family, school and
community.
Inclusive education
30. This component will improve access to quality education mainly at the early childhood
and secondary school levels for improved completion rates, ensuring a gender perspective
and involvement of male caregivers and fathers in proper parenting. The objective is to
contribute to the decrease of over-age students and the increase of early education (aged 06) and lower and upper secondary net enrolment. Particular target groups of this outcome
are out of school children under age 6 and adolescents living in poverty and in violent
communities.
31. The situation analysis of children confirms the limited availability of quality
programmes for early childhood education at the subnational level. UNICEF will support
Government institutions and CSOs to develop and implement inter-institutional protocols
and coordination mechanisms to expand gender-sensitive models of early childhood
education, involving family and community structures (children aged 0-3) and the
institutional track (children aged 4-6) to support better preparedness and transition into
primary school. The main partners are national Government institutions in early childhood
education, municipal governments and CSOs that provide services at the local level, and
families and community organizations.
32. Current education policies and the normative framework have limited operational
instruments for the effective inclusion of out-of-school children and adolescents into the
system, especially in contexts of violence. This component will support the Ministry of
Education in the development and implementation of inclusive and gender-focused
guidelines and models to improve the retention of students at risk of dropping out, and to
incorporate children and adolescents who are out of school because of pregnancy, disability,
poverty and violence, including gender-based. UNICEF will support the implementation of
local demonstrative models aimed at keeping adolescents in secondary school, with a strategy
to document results, lessons learned and opportunities for scaling up.
33. Monitoring the application of quality education standards in schools, and the
effectiveness and relevance of education policies, remains a challenge. UNICEF will support
the Ministry of Education in the refinement and implementation of the public school
monitoring system supported by a gender-sensitive evaluation mechanism of education
policies and programmes to support the quality of education and school support strategies.
The active participation of school administrators, teachers, students and parents is critical to

7/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

facilitate continuous and interactive feedback between the national and subnational levels,
including local communities and School Management Committees.
34. Another barrier to guaranteeing the right of education for all children is the low value
assigned by society to early childhood and secondary education, and the insufficient
awareness of education rights, reflected both in the levels of enrolment and in public
investment. UNICEF will continue promoting education as a right through behaviour-change
strategies and sensitization campaigns, but also as a means for improved individual, family
and community life, and stronger social cohesion. This objective entails partnerships to
analyse public investment with academia, research centres, education networks, the private
sector and the media.
Healthy start in life
35. This component contributes to scaling up Committing to Child Survival: A Promised
Renewed (APR) and other regional and global commitments to halt child and maternal
mortality, reduce chronic malnutrition, and involve families and caretakers in healthy,
nurturing, non-violent and gender-sensitive child-rearing practices that enable young
children to develop and thrive to their fullest capacity. Due consideration is given to the
elimination of vertical transmission of HIV. The component prioritizes children living in
impoverished female-headed rural households, which account for the highest child mortality
and teen pregnancy rates.
36. Despite recent progress in the health sector, the normative and policy framework
encounters challenges in ensuring greater impact on child health and nutrition. UNICEF will
support the Ministry of Health in the development and implementation of a strategy to
improve and scale up cost-efficient models of quality prenatal, delivery and perinatal care,
expanding quality health services for children aged 0-5. UNICEF will play a convening role,
in close coordination and alignment with the Pan American Health Organization, the United
Nations Population Fund and selected national and local civil society partners. Barriers
identified in the Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 Acceleration Framework have been
taken into account.
37. Challenges remain in the supply of health services in remote rural zones. UNICEF will
support subnational authorities in the development and implementation of systems to
facilitate coordinated responses to guarantee the access of children, women and families to
quality and integral health and nutrition services. The municipalities prioritized will be
selected among those with the highest rates of neonatal mortality, chronic malnutrition and
teen pregnancy.
38. The component will create the opportunities to enhance the use and effectiveness of
mechanisms for increased accountability and demand from rights holders about health
services, and will include the development of tools that allow authorities and society to
monitor and mobilize around the supply, affordability and appropriateness of child health and
nutrition services. Behaviour-change strategies will be built into this process to stimulate
healthy practices of parents and active demand for services. Key partners are the Ministries
of Health and Education, the National Neonatal Alliance and the subscribers to APR.
UNICEF also participates in the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and Mesoamerica without
Hunger initiative.
Social inclusion and monitoring of children’s rights

8/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

39. This component enables children and adolescents, particularly the most excluded and
disadvantaged, to benefit from integrated social protection systems that ensure their inclusion
and improved equity. The component will ensure that institutional responses for the
protection, development and care of children and adolescents are effective, integrated,
properly funded, and focused on relevant transformations for the full enjoyment of children’s
rights.
40. The universal social protection system of El Salvador has several programmes for
children that could achieve more effective and efficient results if delivered in a more integral
and coordinated manner. UNICEF will support the Government to strengthen inter-sectoral
management, such as the registration of children and follow-up mechanisms, for enhanced
effectiveness of social policy and incorporation of children into inclusive systems that protect
them from poverty. Activities will complement the other three components to ensure
convergence and documentation of results at the sectoral level.
41. In a context of limited resources and great demands for the realization of the rights of
children and adolescents, public policies and interventions need to be pertinent, efficient, and
evidence-based. This component strengthens national capacities for monitoring and
analysing the situation of children, by making available comparable and disaggregated
statistics on children, and evaluating national policies and programmes that focus on their
well-being with initiatives at the national and subnational levels targeting the most
vulnerable. Partnerships and alliances will be developed with academia, research centres and
civil society. National authorities and civil society will be supported to monitor
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and the Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.
42. Resource allocations for the social protection system, sectoral policies and childcentred interventions have increased recently, but the coverage is insufficient to effect a
substantive change in the lives of the most disadvantaged children, and could also be more
efficient. UNICEF will support the Government and civil society in the development and
use of mechanisms to monitor and analyse public investment in children at the national and
subnational levels, leading to institutionalized child-sensitive public budgeting and improved
participation, demand and accountability for children and other stakeholders.
Cross-sectoral
43. This component supports programme management, including technical assistance and
activities in the four components related to communication for development, programme
performance monitoring and evaluation, and disaster risk reduction.

9/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Children protected from violence

900

2 500

3 400

Inclusive education

900

2 500

3 400

Healthy start in life

900

1 000

1 900

Social inclusion and monitoring of children’s
rights

1 000

1 000

2 000

Cross-sectoral

1 095

1 000

2 095

4 795

8 000

12 795

Total

Programme and risk management
44. UNICEF will ensure programme quality, efficiency and effectiveness through the
regular updating of its risk profile, with special focus on: partner relations; change
management; funding predictability; natural disasters; processes, procedures and controls;
knowledge management; and talent management.
45. The UNICEF resource mobilization and leveraging strategy responds to the evolving
donor trends in the country and region. Regular resources will secure technical expertise to
assist partners develop innovative models and initiatives, undertake evaluation and document
best practices, while other resources will focus on taking models to scale.
46. UNICEF regularly updates its Early Warning/Early Action system, and financial
resources will help to improve stockpiling and readiness. Emergency preparedness and
resilience will be prioritized, and capacity-building undertaken for programme partners and
UNICEF staff. UNICEF will lead the education and nutrition clusters and co-lead the
protection, water, sanitation and hygiene, and shelter clusters.
47. UNICEF contributes to the achievement of four of the five outcomes of the UNDAF,
and will chair relevant thematic working groups based on expertise. DaO Standard Operating
Procedures will be managed by the United Nations Country Team. UNICEF will ensure full
compliance with the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers. Annual reviews, coordinated
by the Vice-Ministry for Development Cooperation and the Presidential Technical and
Planning Secretariat, will assist partners to identify corrective actions to ensure transparent
use of resources and achievement of expected results.
48. This CPD outlines UNICEF contributions to national results and serves as the primary
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to
the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s
programme and operations policies and procedures.

10/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

Monitoring and evaluation
49. UNICEF will strengthen monitoring and evaluation capacities of national and
subnational government and civil society partners to monitor the situation of children, the
impact of national policies and programmes on their well-being, and the compliance of the
Government with the recommendations related to the principal child rights conventions and
treaties. Focused capacity-building of selected partners, and the annual updating and
publication of a data-set on child indicators developed by the National Institute of Statistics,
will be undertaken with UNICEF support.
50. The UNICEF-supported MICS, other survey, and administrative data will be used to
establish baselines to monitor the key programme outcome results. In the context of DaO, a
coordinated, multi-agency approach to institutional capacity-strengthening will be pursued.
UNICEF and the United Nations Development Programme will support the development of
a national multidimensional poverty and social protection monitoring system.
51. The United Nations Monitoring and Evaluation Working Group, which includes
UNICEF, will regularly monitor the evolution of indicators associated with the UNDAF
outcomes. UNICEF will undertake two upstream evaluations of the national policy on early
childhood development and violence prevention, and of the strategy for out-of-school
children.

11/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

Annex
Results and resources framework
El Salvador-UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: 1-7,9, 10-19, 22-32, 34,36-40
National priorities:
1. Five Year Development Plan Objectives 2014-2019: 2. Human development potential; 3. Citizen´s security; 4.Access to universal quality health services;
5: Transition to a fair and equitable society.
UNDAF outcomes involving UNICEF: 1. Access to quality basic goods and services; 3. Consensus building; 4. Resilience to disasters; and 5.Citizen
security and justice.
Outcome indicators measuring change that include UNICEF contribution
Multidimensional poverty index
Decent work index
Aggregated indicator of government effectiveness
World risk index
Violence against children index
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcomes: Health; Nutrition; Education; Child Protection; Social Inclusion
UNICEF outcomes

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets
(To be disaggregated by
gender, area and well-being)

Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme outputs

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

Children protected
from violence

Indicator 1:
Proportion of cases resolved
by the Protection Boards
Baseline: 20%
Target: 40%

School
census

Output 1. CONNA and
related institutions are
equipped to implement
effective instruments and
mechanisms for the
coordination, articulation and
evaluation of the National
Integral Protection System

CONNA

RR

OR

Total

Ministry of
Education (MOE)

900

2 500

3 400

By 2020, children and
adolescents in the
most violent
municipalities have
increased access to

12/16

Indicator 2:

National
Council for
Children
and
Adolescents

Vice-Ministry of
Salvadorans
Abroad

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome, by regular
resources (RR) and other
resources (OR)
(in thousands of United
States dollars)

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

protection systems
allowing them to live
free from violence,
abuse, exploitation,
and neglect, with a
particular focus on
gender-based
violence.

Proportion of children and
adolescents whose cases have
been resolved who are in
specialized restitution and
reintegration programmes
Baseline: TBD by end-2015
Target: TBD by end-2015

(CONNA)
statistics
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey
(MICS)

Indicator 3:
Proportion of children and
adolescents of selected
schools and municipalities
who participate in local
violence- prevention
programmes
Baseline: TBD by end-2015
Target: TBD by end-2015

By 2020, children and
adolescents,

Judicial system
Selected
municipalities
CSO

Output 4. Children and
adolescents from selected
schools and municipalities
have increased knowledge on
the prevention of genderbased violence and generate
greater peer awareness around
the issue, focusing on sexual
violence and the prevention of
adolescent pregnancy

Indicator 5:
Percentage of children under
14 years who are victims of
domestic, psychological or
physical punishment
Baseline: 52%
Target: 40%
Indicator 1:
Net attendance rate in early
education and preschool

Public Ministry

Output 3. National
authorities have capacity to
implement strengthened and
specialized programmes for
attention to and restitution of
rights of child victims of
violence, and unaccompanied
child migrants

Indicator 4:
Number of reported incidents
of sexual aggression against
children (aged 10-19)
Baseline: 2,050
Target: 1,800

Inclusive education

Output 2. Selected
municipalities have capacity
to implement a validated
strategy for the prevention of
and protection from violence
against children and
adolescents, including genderbased violence, as part of the
framework established by the
National Integral Protection
System

MultiPurpose
Household
Survey

Output 1. Government
institutions and civil society
organizations (CSOs) that
provide early childhood

Ministries of
Education and
Health

900

2 500

3 400

13/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

particularly the most
disadvantaged, have
increased access to,
and complete full
cycles of, quality early
childhood and
secondary education
in an inclusive
education system.

among children in the two
poorest quintiles
Baseline:
Early childhood (0-3 years)
T: 2.0% M: 2.0% F: 2.0%
Preschool (0-4 years)
T: 59.9% M: 60.2% F:59.6%
Target: 5 additional
percentage points
Indicator 2:
Net attendance rate in lowerand upper-secondary
education among the two
poorest quintiles
Baseline:
Lower secondary:
T: 62.4 % M: 61.4% F: 63.4%
Upper secondary:
T: 39.0% M: 37.2% F: 40.9%
Target: 5 additional
percentage points
Indicator 3:
Transition rate to uppersecondary education
Baseline:
T: 79.7% M: 79.0% F: 80.5%
Target: 3 additional
percentage points
Indicator 4:
Out-of-school children at the
lower-secondary level
Baseline: 57,091
Target: 50,000

14/16

School
census

education implement intersectoral protocols for
coordinated scaling up of
successful models of early
education
Output 2. The Ministry of
Education implements
validated mechanisms,
teaching practices,
management tools and
operational procedures to
facilitate retention of students
and inclusion of out-of-school
adolescents.
Output 3. Subnational
authorities and communities/
School Management
Committees have access to
information at school-level
that feeds findings back to the
educational community in
order to improve education
services provision
Output 4. The Ministry of
Education, the Salvadoran
Network for the Right to
Education and civil society
have increased capacity and
evidence for advocating for
increased investment in public
education

CONNA
Salvadoran
Institute for the
Integral
Development of
Children
Planning and
Technical
Secretariat of the
Presidency
(STPP)
National Registry
of Natural Persons
CSOs

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

Healthy start in life
By 2020, children,
particularly those aged
0-5, and pregnant
women have increased
access to quality
health and nutrition
services, healthy
lifestyles and rearing
practices that allow
children to fully
develop.

Indicator 1:
Percentage of teenage (aged
15-19) pregnant women
attended to at least four times
during pregnancy

Ministry of
Health
(MOH)
statistics

Baseline: 90%
Target: 95%

MICS

Indicator 2:
Chronic malnutrition rate
(under 5 years)
Baseline: 13.6%
Target: 10%

MOH
reports

Indicator 3:
Percentage of children (0-5
months) being exclusively
breastfed

By 2020, children and
adolescents who face
multiple deprivations
have increased access
to pertinent, effective
and integrated social
protection systems
that are properly

Indicator 1:
Percentage of children living
in monetary poverty covered
by social protection schemes
Baseline: 31%
Target: 40%
Indicator 2:
Incidence of multidimensional
poverty in children
Baseline: 60%
Target: 55%

MOH/MOE

900

1 000

1 900

1 000

1 000

2 000

Selected
municipalities
CSO

Output 2. Authorities in
selected subnational areas
with high levels of neonatal
mortality and chronic
malnutrition utilize validated
coordinating tools to
guarantee access of children
to integral and quality health
and nutrition services
Output 3. The Government,
CSOs, and the private sector
have access to an information
mechanism to monitor
bottlenecks on MCH and
mobilize demand for quality
public health and nutrition
services.

Baseline: 47%
Target: 52 %

Social inclusion and
monitoring of
children’s rights

Output 1. The Ministry of
Health implements a validated
strategy for the enhancement
and scaling up of costefficient Maternal and Child
Health (MCH) models.

MultiPurpose
Household
Survey
Social
Protection
Universal
System
statistics

Output 1. Government
institutions related to
children´s social protection
systems use management tools
for appropriate inter-sectoral
coordination to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of
the public policy

STPP
MOE
Academia/
research centers
CSO

Output 2. Government
institutions implement
comprehensive and

15/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.28

funded, monitored and
evaluated.

Indicator 3:
Percentage of GDP in public
spending invested in children
Baseline: 6%
Target: 10%
Indicator 4:
Percentage of GDP in public
spending invested in social
protection for children
Baseline: 0.9%
Target: 1.5%

Updated
studies on
financing in
children and
multidimensional child
poverty

specialized mechanisms to
monitor the situation of
children and adolescents, and
evaluate impact of public
policy
Output 3. Government
institutions have mechanisms
to monitor and analyse the
level and quality of public
investment in children
Output 4. CSOs have tools
and mechanisms to access
data and information about
programmes and investments
in children

Cross-sectoral (description on page 9)

1 095

1 000

2 095

Total resources

4 795

8 000

12 795

16/16

