Eritrea
Country programme document
2013-2016

The draft country programme (CPD) document for the
Eritrea (E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1) was approved in accordance with
decision 2012/17, on an exceptional basis, by the Executive Board
at its 2013 first regular session (5-8 February 2013).
The draft CPD was discussed at an informal consultation on
17 December 2012. This final version was approved at the 2013
first regular session of the Executive Board on 8 February 2013.

†

Basic data
(2011 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.6

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

68

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2002)

35 a

(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (%, net male/female, 2010)

23.3/40, ../..
240 b
37/33

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2010)

76

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2005)

61

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2005)

14

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

0.6

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female)

..

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age)

..

GNI per capita (US$)

430

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

99

†

a
b

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
The United Nations Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and The World Bank)
produces internationally comparable sets of maternal mortality data, which account for the
well documented problems of underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths,
including estimates for countries with no data. Comparable time series on maternal mortality
ratios for the years 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010 are available at
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The population of Eritrea was estimated by the Ministry of Health at
3.8 million in 2010, with 2.5 per cent annual growth. Despite an urban population
drift, about two-thirds of Eritreans live in rural and semi-urban areas. Triggered by
recent mining activities, the gross domestic product per capita was estimated at
$549 in 2011, growing at a rate of 8.7 per cent per year. Eritrea is presently
developing the export potential of its minerals reserves, which include gold, copper
and potash. However, economic and social development efforts continue to be
impeded by the ‘no peace, no war’ residual situation from the border conflict with
Ethiopia (Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review, 2009).
2.
Agriculture and pastoralism are the main livelihoods for 80 per cent of
Eritreans. However, food security continues to be a major challenge. The
Government of Eritrea is attempting to boost the domestic food production toward
greater self-reliance, but these efforts are hampered by climatic challenges and
investment constraints. Rainfall varies dramatically in terms of quantity and
reliability.
3.
Since 2009, Eritrea has been subject to United Nations Security Council
sanctions, which were further tightened in 2011. However, it must be noted that the

2

E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1

Government recognizes the negative impact that corruption could have on national
development; a Special Court has been established to implement the zero -tolerance
policy on corruption. This has greatly contributed to aid effectiveness.
4.
Eritrea is on track to achieve half of the Millennium Development Goals 4, 5,
6 and 7 (water target). The country has made significant progress in child and
maternal health. The under-five mortality rate decreased from 136 per 1,000 live
births in 1995 to 63 per 1,000 live births in 2010. The maternal mortality declined
from an estimated 1,400 per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 486 per 100,000 live
births in 2010; 1 the United Nations estimate is 240 per 100,000 live births in 2010.
Eritrea appears to be one of few African countries set to achieve Goals 4 and 5.
5.
However, there is scope for accelerating progress: prenatal, perinatal and
postnatal care services need to be strengthened and coverage of emergency obstetric
care expanded. The main causes of under-five mortality are neonatal complications
(27 per cent), pneumonia (24 per cent), malnutrition and anaemia (21 per cent) and
diarrhoea (13 per cent). Some 20 per cent of under-five deaths occur in the first
week of life. 2 Increased attention is required to the early postnatal period while
maintaining existing satisfactory levels of immunization, community-based
interventions and effective malaria and HIV control, as these have been instrumental
in the rapid reduction of under-five mortality rates.
6.
Progress has been made in achieving Goal 6, combating HIV/AIDS, malaria
and other diseases. The HIV prevalence rate is an estimated 0.8 per cent (United
Nations data, 2008). With 67 per cent of the population living in malaria -endemic
areas, the Ministry of Health scaled up targeted responses over the pa st years. Latest
available figures show that the under-five malaria case fatality has decreased, from
6 per cent in 1999 to 0.3 per cent in 2011.
7.
A national nutrition surveillance system is in place, covering 48 sites all over
the country. The national nutrition programme response is linked to information
provided through this system, which showed a high rate of malnutrition in 2009,
compared to an improved situation in 2011. During the biannual national child
health weeks, all children under five underwent mid-upper-arm circumference
measurement. All children detected with a critical nutrition situation were referred
to either community-based or facility treatment options.
8.
According to a 2011 national survey, 3 39 per cent of the population remain
without safe drinking water access, compared to 84 per cent in 1993 and a 2015
target of 21 per cent; 72 per cent are without access to a basic sanitation facility,
compared to 87 cent in 1993 and a 2015 target of 35 per cent. The adoption of
community-led total sanitation (CLTS) as a nation-wide strategy, rolled out in 2009,
has accelerated progress, but shortfalls remain, with significant spatial disparities
(improved latrine access is 92 per cent in urban areas and 25 per cent in rural areas).
Key challenges include diminishing water resources, periodic droughts, poor
sanitation access, and weak operation and maintenance of water supply systems.
9.
The education trends in the first decade after independence were impressive,
as the number of schools increased and new schools were opened in rural areas. A
__________________
1
2
3

12-62269

Eritrean Population and Health Survey, 2010.
Ministry of Health, National Child Survival Strategy, 2009-2013.
Ministry of Land, Water and Environment, Water Supply Coverage and Functionality Status
Survey and Analysis, 2011.

3

very low net enrolment ratio of 23 per cent rose to 52.6 per cent in 2005 but
declined to 49.6 per cent in 2010 (Education Management Information System,
2009/2010). The specific challenges are inequitable access, gender disparities and
low learner achievement. The factors that hinder children in accessing education
spring from supply and demand sides. On the supply side, there is a shortage of
schools, combined with overcrowded classrooms, shortage of female teachers and
trained teachers in mother tongue, lack of sanitation facilities, difficulties in
adapting the implementation of the school curriculum to local realities, and
inadequate supply of learning and instructional materials. The demand -side factors
include poverty, particularly inability to afford the direct or indirect costs to
schooling, limited parental and community involvement in schooling, as well as
social and cultural obstacles, such as early marriage and undervaluing the benefits
of education.
10. Significant progress was made in accelerating the abandonment of female
genital mutilation/cutting practices (FGM/C). According to disaggregated national
analysis of the Eritrean Population and Health Survey 2010, the prevalence rate
declined from 89 per cent to 83 per cent — this was due to the sustained collective
action of the community and the systemic institutionalized response across
government sectors as well as criminalization of the practice.
11. The presence of landmines is still widespread, potentially affecting 650,000
people, the majority of them children. Some 40 per cent of children under five are
still not registered at birth, an estimated 105,000 children are orphans and 23,000
children are living with a disability, while the number of children in contact with the
law increased from 6,000 in 2008 to 8,000 in 2010. 4 The 2011 Health Management
Information System indicates that injuries from landmines, road accidents,
drowning, burns and falls, and other violence are now among the first fi ve morbidity
factors for children above five years in Eritrea.
12. Eritrea is party to five of the seven core international human rights treaties,
including some of their optional protocols; and it has acceded to two of the three
African human rights treaties. The Government is preparing to accede to the
remaining core international human rights treaties. As one of the first State
signatories to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Eritrea remains fully
committed to its operationalization. In early 2012, the Government submitted its
fourth periodic report to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including its
initial report on the two Optional Protocols. An inter-ministerial framework to guide
the Government’s actions with regard to the Conventio n on the Rights of the Child
has been established; this has facilitated the translation and publication of the
Convention’s provisions in six local languages. In line with Eritrea’s principle of
self-reliance, any assistance will focus on the national priorities and policy
guidelines for bilateral and multilateral cooperation.

__________________
4

4

Government of State of Eritrea, fourth periodic report on the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2012
Key results achieved
13. A major achievement of the country programme was the partnership with the
Government to support its efforts to reduce under-five child mortality and maternal
mortality. During the previous programme cycle, a total of 210 community-based
and 57 therapeutic feeding facilities as well as 263 supplementary feeding
programme sites were operational, covering 80 per cent of severely and moderately
malnourished children in Eritrea. Blanket supplementary feeding in four out of six
regions (zobas) reached 90 per cent of the targeted children and women to prevent
further deterioration of nutritional status. The immunization system was further
strengthened with the introduction of pentavalent vaccine in 2008, as well as
procurement of vaccines, availability of injection safety materials and training of
service providers. These contributed to maintaining more than 80 per cent coverage
of three doses of combined diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus vaccine, reducing vaccine preventable diseases to the extent that no measles deaths or polio cases were
reported, and the neonatal tetanus elimination target was achieved. UNICEF work
with the Ministry of Health on prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
contributed to increased access to HIV testing services, with 72.5 per cent of health
facilities offering HIV testing, while 48 per cent of pregnant wome n attending
antenatal care tested for HIV in 2011.
14. UNICEF supported the Ministry of Health in introducing the CLTS programme
in 2007, with implementation starting the following year. Since 2008, 165 of 2,663
villages have been declared open defecation free; this corresponds to 344,660
people out of an estimated 3.8 million, constituting roughly 10 per cent of the
population. The water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) programme component
supported the Water Resources Department of the Government to improv e water
supplies for 247,377 people in rural areas. Some 154 WASH committees were
formed and trained to build local sustainability.
15. The basic education and gender equality programme produced good results,
notably in the areas of access and equity to education. Successful approaches, such
as the complementary elementary education and the nomadic education projects,
were able to reach the very remote areas of the country and enrol 14,175 children
(45 per cent girls) for the first time. Life-skills education has been integrated from
upper elementary (grade 4) to secondary level, and all children in schools are
benefiting from such interventions. The child-friendly schools project was less
successful, mainly due to a lack of resources for replication. The f ocus has now
turned to mainstreaming the principles of child-friendly schools in sector dialogue
and strategy.
16. The child protection programme supported the Government in scaling up the
community-based alternative care system, reaching 7,362 orphans (47 per cent
females). The reunification programme included various policy options, such as
community reunification, adoption, fostering, as well as placement in group homes
or orphanages as a last resort. Some 4,515 families with children infected with
HIV/AIDS were provided with cash grants to start small-scale income-generating
activities. The 2007 Proclamation banning FGM/C was a milestone in combating a
practice that is still deeply rooted in the cultural and religious beliefs; significant

12-62269

5

progress was made primarily due to increased government commitment,
criminalization of the practice and sustained with advocacy support from UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations Population Fund. In addition,
behaviour change (of not cutting girls) was increasingly accepted through
community networking, public health education, life-skills education and
engagement of religious leaders. Consequently, the incidence dropped dramatically,
declining to 33 per cent and 11.9 per cent, respectively, among girls under 15 and
girls under five. However, as reported in the Government’s fourth periodic report on
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, national disparities still exist across the
regions (zobas) despite progress in various areas of the programme. Regrettably,
according to data from the 2011 Health Management Information System, child
injuries from all causes, such as landmines, road accidents, domestic falls, drowning
and forest burns increased among children over 5 years, from approximately 8,00 0
cases in 2001 to 40,677 cases in 2011. In recent years, resource constraints have
jeopardized the gains made so far in child protection.
17. Some 540,000 people (70 per cent children) living in areas contaminated by
mines were reached with mine risk education activities, including internally
displaced children. UNICEF and the World Health Organization began action in
2009 towards addressing child injuries from all causes. This resulted in development
of an integrated national injury surveillance system fo r the monitoring of incidence,
trends and related risk factors. Additionally, the emergency response system was
strengthened through the provision of first-aid kits and health technology equipment
for the rehabilitation and physiotherapy centres for child victims. A national policy
for persons with disabilities and the 2012-2016 National Strategic Plan on Child
Injury, Violence and Disability Prevention were developed, providing a strategic
framework for the care and protection of children.
18. The advocacy and partnerships for children programme provided technical
assistance to strengthen national capacities for collecting data on the situation of
children and women, and contributed to the realization of children’s rights through
networking, partnerships and participation. UNICEF supported the National
Statistics Office to conduct and finalize the Eritrean Population and Health Survey.
Partnerships with the Ministry of Information and National Union of Eritrean Youth
and Students resulted in training of national media professionals in reporting on
children and raising child participation through such activities as the creation of a
seven kilometre long continuous painting.
Lessons learned
19. Good economic performance is not the only factor in achieving Millennium
Development Goals and in reducing mortality. In Eritrea, the well -established and
strong community-based health and nutrition services provided an opportunity to
identify sick and needy children and refer them in time, provide timely basic
services closer to their communities and reduce the workload in health facilities.
The biannual child health nutrition and vaccination weeks were valuable in
improving access to immunization services and in tracing dropouts. In the absence
of potential partners and limited logistical capacity, advanced planning is crucial in
ensuring that blanket feeding is provided during the peak pre -harvest period. All
above-mentioned efforts were drivers a successful, sustained achievement toward
Goals 4 and 5.

6

E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1

20. The move from a household subsidy-based approach to a community-based
approach in CLTS represented a radical shift in sanitation programming, as it
facilitated the increased participation, involvement and engagement of communities
in identifying its own needs and in responding to them individually, using
indigenous technical know-how and encouraging greater ownership. Additionally, it
has been noted that CLTS creates social expectations around sanitation, thereby
creating demand for sanitation services.
21. The systemic approach towards the abandonment of FGM/C proved to be
successful and innovative. Known as ‘Habarawi’ and meaning “collective” in
Tigrinya, the methodology adopted to reduce the practice simultaneously integrated
all levels of society — from the Government to religious leaders, youth and
women’s organizations, community leaders, former circumcisers and victims. Each
sector actively played a role in building this consensus. The approach is currently
being documented, to be shared with other countries facing challenges in reducing
the practice of FGM/C.
22. The success of the nomadic education programme can be attributed to the
following factors: (a) continuous community-wide campaigns in nomadic areas; (b)
collaboration with communities in setting up learning spaces with locally available
materials; (c) recruitment of teachers and facilitators from the local communities;
(d) provision of education incentives in the form of schooling materials and
uniforms; and (e) introduction of flexible curricula that allow the children of the
nomadic communities to join classes according to their movement patterns.

The country programme, 2013-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Health and nutrition

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 046

17 200

18 246

Basic education

990

6 734

7 724

Water, sanitation and hygiene

996

12 000

12 996

Child protection

960

5 815

6 775

Advocacy and partnerships

1 841

720

2 561

Cross-sectoral

2 019

2 400

4 419

Total

7 852

44 869

52 721

Note: Additional emergency funding from consolidated appeals is anticipated.

Preparation process
23. The country programme was developed in consultation with core ministries for
each programme component within their strategic plans, with coordination via the
Ministry of National Development and additional consultation with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. The process was guided by national development goals and
priorities, national planning documents, the Millennium Declarati on and Millennium
Development Goals targets, the midterm review of the United Nations Development

12-62269

7

Assistance Framework, recommendations from the Human Rights Council Universal
Periodic Review and the Committee on the Rights of the Child , as well as the draft
United Nations country team strategic partnership framework (collectively reviewed
as part of an analysis of the situation of Eritrean children, carried out to inform that
process).
Programme components, results and strategies
24. The country programme incorporates actions within and across the programme
components to support domestic agencies, relevant government institutions and
local communities to better integrate disaster risk reduction and emergency
preparedness within national strategic planning, preparedness and services. The
programme scope will be nationwide, focusing on equity and gender equality,
targeting the most vulnerable and hard-to-reach children and women. Primary
strategic attention in the development of the programme has been dire cted to
vertical integration, from the national level to the subregional (sub -zoba) level,
linking policy and planning with local priorities and actions, implementing effective
service integration strategies in accelerating outcomes, and strengthening
mechanisms for performance and results monitoring, environmental threats and
sustainability. Service delivery will emphasize community empowerment and rural
access to interventions, supported by communication -for-development strategies
aimed to promote resilience and self-reliance and reduce dependence, through
community mobilization and documentation of experiences and best practices.
Capacity development will include strengthening of the management capability of
zoba and sub-zoba services and of primary national actors in child rights,
complemented by knowledge management measures across service providers, with
particular attention given to the education and empowerment of duty bearers and
caregivers, based on participatory approaches.
25. Health and nutrition. This programme component aims to fulfil the rights of
Eritrean children to health and nutrition. It supports the promotion and provision of
quality preventive, curative and rehabilitative health and nutrition care services so
that they are appropriate, affordable and accessible to all, and supports progress
towards meeting the child and women-related targets of the Millennium
Development Goals and those for accelerated child survival development. There are
three programme component results expected by 2016: (a) improved access and
utilization of basic packages of child health services (integrated maternal and
neonatal care interventions and expanded programme of immunization services),
giving priority to hard-to-reach and remote areas; (b) improved access and
utilization of basic packages of maternal health services and interventions, giving
priority to hard-to-reach and remote areas; and (c) underweight prevalence among
children under five reduced, from 38 per cent (2010) to 23 per cent, focussing on the
most disadvantaged groups and hard-to-reach and remote areas.
26. The programme will achieve those key results by maintaining existing
interventions and scaling up measures that leverage further progress, notably in
neonatal care, under-five nutrition, integrated management of neonatal and
childhood illnesses, vaccination, maternal health, paediatric HIV and prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Further, attention will be on community-based
intervention, including provision of outreach service s. The main implementing
partner will be the Ministry of Health, in close collaboration with United Nations
organizations.

8

E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1

27. Basic education. This component recognizes the need to focus selectively on
higher-impact strategies that add value to efforts by the Ministry of Education in
strengthening education performance. The main goal will be to enhance
participation and retention rates, with particular emphasis on equity with quality. It
aims to build on previous progress in the areas of complementary elementary
education, nomadic education and to assist the Government in enhancing the quality
of basic education. The key programme results expected by 2016 are as follows:
(a) equitable access to basic formal and non-formal education ensured for 50,000
children (with particular emphasis on girls) in Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka,
Debubawi K'eyih Bahri (SRS) and Semenawi Keyih Bahri (NRS). This result will
be achieved in partnership with the Ministry of Education, particularly the
departments of general education and research and human resource development,
and the regional and local administrations. Further, the focus will be on enhancing,
by 2016, access to an education that meets minimum standards, as defined by
Government: (b) learning outcomes will have improve d for all children. This result
will be achieved by supporting the mainstreaming of government initiatives to
enhance education quality and by focussing on enhancing the quality of education
for marginalized groups, specifically through support to nomadic education,
complementary elementary education, girls’ education and vulnerable children.
28. Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). This component will contribute to
the achievement of Goal 7 target 10 on improved drinking water and sanitation. It
aims to increase improved and safe access to WASH services and practices, focusing
on vulnerable groups, including people in drought-prone areas. There are three
programme component results, across all six zobas, expected by 2016: (a) 80
additional communities will have environmentally sustainable improved drinking
water sources; (b) 300 selected villages will become open defecation free; and (c)
gender-sensitive WASH facilities are installed and utilized within 30 selected
elementary schools in rural areas.
29. The key results will be achieved through a demand-responsive participatory
approach, to advance equitable outcomes, with a focus on rural populations. It will
involve coordination, collaboration and partnerships with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, as well as donor agencies, the Water Resources Department, the Ministry of
Health and regional and local administrations involved in construction,
rehabilitation or upgrading of water supplies and in improving the sanitation and
hygiene situation. Community water and sanitation committees will manage
systems, with full participation of women in key positions. Household -based water
management options (e.g. self-supply) will be explored to increase self-reliance and
sustainability. Children, teachers and community representatives will be involved in
preparing school WASH plans. The primary outcomes will focus on the
Government’s commitments to achieving the Millennium Development Goals
targets in accessing safe water and improved sanitation, which have been
accelerated since 2007 using the CLTS methodology and a focus on improving
knowledge, encouraging community and household ownership, as well as better
household hygiene practices and upgraded school-based WASH facilities.
30. Child protection. This component aims to support the strengthening of the
national social welfare system for protecting children and young people in the most
disadvantaged communities from harmful practices, injuries, vio lence and
exploitation, as well as promoting the realization of children’s rights to justice and

12-62269

9

birth registration. The expected component results are as follows: (a) children and
adolescents at risk are protected from harmful practices, exposure to injur ies,
violence and exploitation; and (b) the integrated national social welfare assistance
system strengthened.
31. The key results will be achieved through preventive, protective and
rehabilitative strategies, particularly policy dialogue, facilitation of South-South
cooperation, encouragement of entrepreneurship skills and partnership building,
including advocacy for improving access to child and adolescent -friendly basic
social services, birth registration and social justice. Efforts will involve explorin g
feasible technological initiatives, scholarly surveys and documentation. Adolescents
and young people will be reached through counselling and comprehensive health
and life skills education. UNICEF will support the Government in mapping
communities collectively abandoning FGM/C and strengthen the capacities of local
structures in promoting safety nets and social behaviour change towards early
marriage. It will also promote the integration of mine risk education and prevention
of injuries, violence and disabilities within the broader public health system.
32. Advocacy and partnerships for children. This component comprises
technical support in strengthening national capacities in data collection, research
and policy analysis and advocacy that are also mainstreamed within the individual
programme components. This includes attention to cross-sectoral linkages in
enhancing the complementarity of those components. There are two overarching
interventions: (a) strengthened capacity of the Ministry of Information a nd civil
society organizations to promote child rights and children’s participation; and (b)
enhanced monitoring, reporting and evaluation mechanisms. The strategic position
of UNICEF will be enhanced by leveraging external resources towards agreed
national priorities. Communication-for-development activities will be central to
informing vulnerable children and young people and engaging them in accessing
support networks and social networking for their improved protection.
33. Cross sectoral. This component will cover management and support for the
country programme, including programme planning and coordination, with
particular emphasis on mainstreaming of gender awareness. Expenses related to
supply, logistics, information technology, administration and f inance are included in
this component.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
34. While the Government’s national development plan has yet to be shared with
the United Nations organizations, the various ministries’ sector plans have been
finalized and are available. These have been instrumental in informing the priorities
for action. The United Nations is currently developing a strategic partnership
cooperation framework that will ensure national priorities are sufficiently reflected
within the country programme.
Relationship to international priorities
35. The country programme contributes to attaining child and women -related
Millennium Development Goals and to maintaining such momentum beyond 2015.
Its activities on legislative reform, policy development, strengthening
implementation mechanisms and enhanced participation contribute to all focus areas
of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, and reflect key recommendations of the

10

E/ICEF/2013/P/L.1

Committee on the Rights of the Child, provisions of the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child and principles of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The programme supports the
commitments and priorities of Education for All, the Convention on the Prohib ition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti -Personnel Mines and on
their Destruction, the International Labour Organization Convention 13 on the
minimum age for employment, and the principles and commitments of A World Fit
for Children as well as those of Africa Fit for Children. The Government has
announced its intention to ratify additional international human rights instruments
relevant to the Eritrean child.
Major partnerships
36. Beyond the bilateral Framework of Cooperation 2011 -2012, major partnerships
are with individual government ministries on specific activities within each
programme component. Other key partners include the National Union of Eritrean
Youth and Students and the National Union of Eritrean Women, especially in areas
of implementation, advocacy and capacity strengthening. These will be carried out
under the overall coordination of the Ministry of National Development, and will be
complemented by UNICEF leveraging associated resources from international
development cooperation partners. There is capacity for possible joint programming
under this framework. UNICEF will collaborate with other United Nations
organizations in Eritrea. Key international partners include the Gavi Alliance, the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and the Global Partnership
for Education. UNICEF will facilitate the engagement of the Government with these
partners. The harnessing of partnerships for improved sustainability of behaviour
change across many areas means that an emphasis on the participation of families,
children and key local personnel (teachers and health workers) is critical to building
sustainability toward improved self-reliance.
37. UNICEF will harness its comparative advantage in supporting the Government
in the strategic development of South-South cooperation, with an emphasis on
regional linkages and technical exchanges.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
38. Key indicators for monitoring progress towards programme results, and
strategic choices for monitoring and evaluation activities, are detailed in the
summary results matrix and the five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation
Plan. It incorporates research, programme monitoring and evaluation activities, and
will be updated annually. Government management information systems in health
and education remain key sources of information, with UNICEF supporting
qualitative improvements and associated developments within related but more
limited sectors, including child protection. UNICEF, within the strategic framework
of partnership with Government, will support relevant institutions with data
systems, coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The Government has already
indicated that this is a priority for the country.
39. UNICEF will conduct annual programme reviews, with a midterm review to
take place in 2014. To minimize transaction costs to the Government and other
partners, the country programme review will be incorporated within wider sectoral
reviews wherever possible.

12-62269

11

