Ethiopia
Country programme document
2012-2015

The draft country programme document for Ethiopia
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.8) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data† (2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

41.8

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

104

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported 1999-2005)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (%, net male/female, 2005)

33
17/35, 36/25
670 a
45/45 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

40

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

38

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

12

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years old)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

-53
7
6/7, 29/5, 3/18
330

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

79

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

75

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
470 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html/.
b
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Ethiopia has experienced good economic growth in recent years, 1 but the
country is still facing enormous challenges with widespread poverty. The
Government’s new five-year national development plan, Growth and
Transformation Plan, 2010-2014/2015 (GTP), maintains economic growth at its
core. 2 Infrastructure development is central to the plan, together with a focus on
agricultural production. The budget, expanding at 20 per cent annually, will be
funded by increasing savings rate from 9 to 15 per cent of the gross domestic
product (GDP) and increasing tax collection from 9 to 16 per cent of GDP. This
assumes that aid levels stay at current rates and the bud get deficit increases
modestly.
2.
Ethiopia is vulnerable to disease outbreaks as well as natural hazards, such as
droughts and floods, and continues to address food insecurity. To cope with this, the
country maintains a humanitarian response system. The disaster risk reduction
policy will be finalized in 2011, increasing the focus o n managing risk. A work
__________________
1

2

2

According to recent Government data, the growth rate was 11.6 per cent between July 2003 and
June 2009.
Growth and Transformation Plan, 2010-2014/2015, Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa, November 2010.

11-29707

guarantee scheme targets 8 million people with payment in cash or food to help
protect and grow household assets until they qualify for inc lusion in a microcredit
scheme.
3.
Gender equality efforts focus on preferential access by poor women to
microcredit at low interest rates and ensuring that more girls get secondary or
vocational training. It also includes increased advocacy and mobilization calling for
abandonment of harmful traditional practices, especially female geni tal cutting and
early marriage.
4.
The health sector share of the national budget will grow within an expanding
budget. The budget increase means resources should become available to upgrade
services. This will include upgrading neonatal and maternal health services (less
than 10 per cent of births take place in health centres and only 6 per cent of women
with obstetric complications receive professional treatment); improving the
availability and quality of basic health services, including allocations for recurrent
expenditures such as kerosene for refrigerators at health posts to improve routine
immunization coverage rates; and covering costs of therapeutic food for severely
malnourished children.
5.
The employment of 34,000 health extension workers has brought health-care
services closer to many people. The impact of this programme is being evaluated,
but reports of malaria epidemics have fallen, the number of malnourished children
being treated has gone up and cases of acute watery diarrhoea seem to be declining,
due partly to improved hygiene practice and better access to safe water sources. The
quality of immunization services needs to be improved. The 2011 Demographic and
Health Survey will measure HIV prevalence and help to improve understanding of
the epidemic. Less than 10 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women receive
services for prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT), and the new
World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for PMTCT have not yet been
adopted.
6.
Access to water and sanitation continues to improve, but in rural areas it often
lags far behind urban areas. The Government reports coverage of safe water supply
increased to 65.8 per cent in rural areas in 2010, significantly more than the estimate
of 38 per cent in 2008 by the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme. New
information from the national water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH)
inventory and the Demographic and Health Survey will provide further details. As
coverage increases, unit costs of providing safe water to remaini ng communities
will rise. Private sector engagement is still underdeveloped and cannot keep up with
demand. Demographic, climate change and environmental pressures threaten water
resources.
7.
Sanitation and hygiene have improved, benefiting from the Health Extension
Programme (HEP), but over 30 million people (about one third of the population)
lack any form of toilet. Government reports indicate that 60 per cent of people use
covered sanitation facilities. The figure for sanitation coverage from the Joint
Monitoring Programme is lower, at 12 per cent. Hand -washing rates are 20 per cent.
Most health and school facilities lack an appropriate water, sanitation and hygiene
(WASH) infrastructure, and only one third of WASH financing needs are being met.
8.
The public education sector has made great strides towards setting up systems,
increasing access to universal primary education and improving gender parity at

3

primary school level. It has succeeded in including education in emergencies and
early childhood care and education in the Education Sector Development
Programme IV. The challenges for education are to ensure continued support to
systems performance; accelerate access to and improve quality of integrated early
childhood development and school readiness; increase access to primary education
for the remaining 15 to 20 per cent of out-of-school children; address quality at
general education level; 3 and expand access to general secondary education with a
special focus on equity and girls’ education. The GTP maintains the proportion of
budget allocated to education at recent levels, a 20 per cent expansion in rea l terms
in the past five years.
9.
Where extended families are unable to absorb children without parental care
and in the absence of a formal system of family-based alternative care, over 7,000
children find themselves in child care institutions. 4 An estimated 12,000 children
live on the street in Addis Ababa. 5 Exceptional progress has been made in informing
the population about harmful traditional practices and reducing their prevalence in
Ethiopia. The 2005 Demographic and Health Survey indicated that while 81 per cent
of women aged 45-49 years were circumcised, the figure had declined to 63 per cent
for young women aged 15-19 years.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
10. The current Government-UNICEF country programme contributed to the
following national policies and schemes through advocacy efforts, expanded
partnerships and technical assistance:
(a) The community-based case management of pneumonia, malaria,
diarrhoea and severe malnutrition was rolled out throughout the country; a revised
Health Extension Package (HEP) strategy was developed for pastoralists; and a joint
programme was developed to improve maternal and newborn health and survival.
(b) The National Nutrition Programme was launched, as was a salt iodization
programme.
(c) The national WASH inventory was developed and rolled out in eight pilot
woredas (districts), ensuring verification of access and use of WASH facilities
nationwide; and support was provided to local, regional and national investment,
planning and targeting. The Government is committed to introduc ing this initiative
nationwide.
__________________
3

4

5

4

A recent assessment across 8 of Ethiopia’s 11 regional states indicated that, based on Grade 2
minimum learning competencies, on average, 20 per cent of Grade 3 learners and 33.9 per cent
of Grade 2 learners could not read words correctly. Early Grade Reading Assessment, United
States Agency for International Development, 2010.
Improving Care Options for Children in Ethiopia through Understanding Institutional Child
Care Factors Driving Institutionalization, Family Health International, the Children’s
Investment Fund Foundation, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Ministry of Women’s
Affairs and UNICEF, June 2010.
“Head Count of Street Children in Addis Ababa” (2010), Addis Ababa Bureau of Children and
Women’s Affairs and Street Invest International (not yet published).

11-29707

(d) The child-friendly schools concept was mainstreamed into the
government’s School Improvement Programme and effectively implemented
nationwide. Environmental education and protection and education in emergencies
were included in the education sector plan; an early childhood care a nd education
policy framework and strategic operational plan was launched; the National Girls ’
Education Strategy was revised; and the alternative basic education approach was
supported to reach out-of-school children.
(e) A National Strategy on Violence against Women and Children was
developed. A national assessment on the situation of child care institutions was
conducted and a family-based alternative child care plan was developed. The
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict w as signed by
the Government, as was the Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities.
(f) A national life skills programme was established for youth training, and
manuals were developed on youth club management, youth volunteerism, youth life
skills and youth centre standards.
(g) A child rights-based analysis of national laws and policies was
completed, and a Children’s Bill harmonizing existing national legislation with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law was develo ped.
Around the country 1,149 committees on the Convention on the Rights of the Child
were established.
(h) In 2009, Ethiopia ratified the new African Union Social Policy
Framework for Africa. It commits member States to plans of action for social
protection.
(i) A decentralized emergency planning and response planning process was
initiated in seven regions. The aim is to develop capacities to identify predictable
hazards and improve preparedness and humanitarian response. The Government and
its development and humanitarian partners responded to major emergencies related
to food insecurity and acute water diarrhoea in 2008 and 2009.
(j) The capacity of government counterparts was strengthened in local
procurement, warehouse management, inventory control and supply chain
management. Following an assessment of the Ministries of Health, Education and
Water and 16 regional bureaus, a sum of $1.5 million was transferred to government
bureaus for local procurement in 2010, an increase from zero in the previous year.
11. Against the targets set for the 2007-2011 country programme, the following
results were achieved:
(a) HEP was rolled out in nearly all rural villages, reaching 10 million
children under 5 and 1.2 million pregnant women every year.
(b) With implementation of community-based nutrition and management of
severe acute malnutrition, access to services increased dramatically, with 200,000
severely malnourished children receiving treatment every year. Coverage reached 50
per cent of health posts, up from zero in 2007. A key child survival package was
provided to 93 per cent of under-five children.
(c) Almost 2.5 million people (including 1.22 million women and children)
access and use safe water supply facilities, and self-financed sanitation facilities are
used by almost 5 million people.

5

(d) The Education Management Information System and universal primary
education planning were supported to enhance capacity and improve systems
performance. The child-friendly schools concept was mainstreamed into the national
School Improvement Plan. Around 1,500 new Alternative Basic Education Centres
were established, enrolling over 250,000 students, 45 per cent of them girls from the
most remote localities. With widespread training of education personnel on
planning, management, monitoring and evaluation, supply and logistics, around
875,000 students (45 per cent girls) received a quality education.
(e) The programme has been a partner in HIV prevention work targeted at
youth in urban areas with high HIV rates. Approximately 250,000 youth benefited
from voluntary counselling, testing and risk avoidance. A weekly radio drama series
was developed, reaching 1.9 million adolescents and young people throughout the
country with up-to-date HIV prevention and life skills messages.
(f) Around 4,000 police and justice sector officials were trained on child
rights and protection. Four child protection units were renovated in Addis Ababa,
and a database was developed to track cases of violence against women and
children. The Bureau of Labour and the Bureau of Social Affairs are being
supported to expand their capacity to identify and support urban families with
vulnerable children through grants, loans and training in all regions. The number of
children benefiting is small (35,000) but the work is contributing to the policy
dialogue on scaling up social protection following African Union recommendations.
(g) The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development was supported to
produce a comprehensive analysis of the situation of boys and girls. Early
indications are that a major hand-washing behaviour change communication
campaign targeted at acute watery diarrhoea hot spots may be contributing to a
reduction in the frequency and severity of diarrhoea. The HEP strategy has been
supported with development of a community dialogue manual for use by health
extension workers and the production of a 54-episode radio programme.
Lessons learned
12.

Based on reviews, including the 2009 midterm review, lessons learned include:

(a) The programme’s focus on knowledge management has not been strong
enough and needs to support government knowledge management capacity.
(b) Geographic and programmatic convergence of United Nations agencies
around UNDAF results was not effective by the time of the midterm review,
resulting in the creation of three flagship joint programmes 6 focused on maternal
and neonatal health, gender equality and accelerating development in the four
Developing Regional States.
(c) Each sector component of the programme targeted capacity development
and service delivery in 300 districts, which was ambitious given available resources.
Selection of the districts was left to each sector ministry instead of regions, resulting
in a wide geographic spread and little convergence.

__________________
6

6

These are the major joint programmes developed by the UN agencies and the Government of
Ethiopia, based on the recommendation of the 2009 UNDAF midterm review.

11-29707

(d) Procedures regarding direct cash transfers need to be adjusted to operate
in a federal system of government, calling for a move towards six -monthly
disbursements. Reliance on local procurement needs to be expanded.
(e) The difference in reporting periods (UNICEF reports based on the
calendar year while the Government has a July-June fiscal year) has created
challenges in maintaining momentum in programme implementation, as the calendar
year ends at a time when implementing partners are gearing up for a ccelerated
implementation.

The country programme, 2012-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Survival and health

60 552

161 809

222 361

Learning and development

26 329

57 600

83 929

Protective environment and disaster risk reduction

31 001

34 319

65 320

Analysis, communication and participation

18 298

9 236

27 534

24 032

24 021

a

48 053

160 212

286 985 b

447 197

Cross-sectoral costs
Total
a
b

Amount to be agreed for each contribution depending on donor.
This amount excludes $137,000,000 emergency other resources projected for humanitarian
response during the programme cycle.

Preparation process
13. Under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and E conomic Development,
the country programme was developed through consultations with concerned
ministries, regional bureaus, United Nations agencies, bilateral and multilateral
development partners, and civil society organizations. The key results contribut e
directly to the outcomes of the UNDAF (2012-2015), which in turn are aligned with
the national development goals of the GTP 2011-2015.
14. The programme is informed by the 2009 midterm review, the draft situation
analysis and the latest country report on the Millennium Development Goals.
Following a number of workshops, the programme was prepared using the human
rights approach to programming and guided mainly by the following cross -cutting
issues: (a) commitment to humanitarian action; (b) equity focus; (c) capacity
development for programming and planning; (d) geographic targeting;
(e) community dialogue; (f) behaviour change communication; (g) disaster risk
reduction; (h) gender mainstreaming; and (i) balancing UNICEF cooperation
between policy analysis and advocacy, service delivery and capacity-building.
Programme and component results and strategies
15. The overall goal of the country programme is to advance the fulfilment of the
rights of all women and children in Ethiopia to survival, development, participation

7

and protection. The strategy is to support government programmes to increase
access with quality, especially for the most vulnerable communities.
16. The programme will contribute to the following strategic results: (a) children ’s
rights are mainstreamed into development planning, resource allocation, programme
implementation and civic engagement; (b) quality basic services are provided to
target populations through strengthening the management, budgeting and delivery
systems of child-related government programmes; and (c) capacity to prepare for
and respond to emergencies at all levels is increased.
17. The overarching strategies to achieve these results are: (a) a commitment to
harmonization and aid effectiveness; (b) providing technical assistance to improve
knowledge management systems, in order to influence policy and programme design
and leverage resource allocations of government programmes; (c) strengthening
systems for delivery of services at regional level, emphasizing convergence in
selected districts, enhanced capacity, accountability and effective implementation of
government programmes related to children; (d) partnering with the Government,
communities, the private sector, the media, civil society groups and youth and
children’s organizations to accelerate behavioural and social change; (e) focusing on
equity to reach the most vulnerable children in Ethiopia: the poorest children from
families with no or little land in the country’s main regions, pastoralist children
living in the Developing Regional States and girls with fewer opportunities because
of their gender; and (f) focusing on gender, including maternal and neonatal health,
by increasing access to quality basic and secondary education and income generating activities for women, and ending harmful traditional practices, including
early marriage and female genital cutting; (g) focusing on the environment through
environmental science education and promotion of climate change adaptation
technology in schools, and (h) supporting the implementation of the DRM policy
once adopted, including capacity development at sub-national levels for emergency
preparedness and response and social protection programmes.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
18. The country programme is aligned to the GTP and sectoral development plans
and frameworks. It supports the outcomes under the four UNDAF pillars:
(a) sustainable economic growth and risk reduction; (b) basic social services;
(c) governance and capacity development, and (d) women, youth and children.
Relationship to international priorities
19. The programme will be guided by the Millennium Development Goals,
Convention on the Rights of the Child, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, Core Commitments for Children in Emergencies
and other international and regional commitments. It will contribute to results in all
focus areas of the medium-term strategic plan.
Programme components
20. Survival and health. This component will address the major causes of disease
and malnutrition among children and regional disparities thereof. It will address
challenges related to policy development and implementation, access to quality
service delivery, empowerment of communities to plan and ma nage local service
delivery, integration of interventions (humanitarian and developmental) into

8

11-29707

government systems, and capacity to implement and monitor progress in sector
plans.
21. It will support the objectives of the GTP, to reach the Millennium
Development Goals and improve the quality of health and nutrition services, and of
the Health Sector Development Plan, to reduce morbidity, mortality and disability
and improve the population’s health and nutrition status. It also supports the
following UNDAF outcomes by 2015: (a) the Ethiopian population, in particular
women, children and vulnerable groups, will have improved access to and use
quality health, nutrition and WASH services; and (b) all in need have improved HIV
prevention, treatment, care and support.
22. This component will contribute to the following results at national and
regional levels by 2015:
(a) Government capacity and systems are improved for evidence -based,
equitable and gender-sensitive planning, management, logistics and information
systems to support implementation of the health sector development plan, universal
access plan (for safe water) and National Nutrition Programme.
(b) At least 80 per cent of children, youth and women in rural, pastoralist
and urban areas use quality, gender-sensitive and equitable preventive, promotional
and basic curative health and nutrition services at community and health -post level.
(c) A total of 3,200 health centres and 120 hospitals deliver quality,
equitable, gender-sensitive curative and life-saving services focusing on common
newborn, child and maternal illnesses and complications, integrated with PMTCT.
(d) Government capacity and systems to improve sustainable access to basic
WASH services are strengthened at federal, regional and woreda (district) levels
with a focus on evidence-based priority setting and planning; cost-effective and
integrated approaches to service delivery are in place; decision -making with a
strong gender dimension is localized; and programmatic support is available in at
least 80 learning districts spanning all regions of the country.
(e) Effective inter-sectoral coordination mechanisms are in place to support
implementation of national and regional plans for improved health and survival of
women and children.
23. The main strategies to achieve these results are capacity building for policy
development and sector coordination; development and scaling up of innovative
methods of programme implementation, including high -impact health, nutrition and
WASH interventions in communities through outreach and in health facilities;
capacity development at woreda and community levels; strengthening information
management systems; increasing access to and quality of service delivery and
partnerships; and support to decentralized procurement of supplies.
24. Learning and development. This component will support interventions to
address the causes of lack of access, participation and completion of basic and lower
secondary education. It will address challenges of enrolment, gender and
geographical disparities, quality, completion and dropout rates, school environment
and capacity to implement sector plans. Several studies have been commissioned to
provide data for the new programme, including an evaluative baseline study of the
UNICEF-supported education programme, an analysis of gender-based violence and
a comparative study of public and private schools.

9

25. This component will support the GTP, expanding and ensuring quality of
education services, and the major priority actions in the Edu cation Sector
Development Programme. It also supports the UNDAF outcome regarding equitable
access and quality education for boys and girls at pre-primary, primary and postprimary levels with a focus on the most vulnerable children and localities.
26. The programme component will contribute to the following results at national
and regional levels:
(a) The Ministry of Education, regional education bureaus, woreda education
offices and schools have the human and institutional capacity to improve sector
performance, develop and interpret better policies, and build systems to improve
access and learning achievement. The emphasis will be on reaching
remote/pastoralist and vulnerable populations.
(b) Children from the prenatal stage to age 7 living in at least 120 lagging
woredas are supported with integrated health, nutrition, protection, early stimulation
and school readiness interventions and are physically, emotionally, socially and
cognitively ready to learn.
(c) All out-of-school girls and boys living in selected lagging woredas,
including those affected by emergencies, have access to, participate in and complete
general education of high quality.
(d) Girls and boys living in at least 120 lagging woredas demonstrate core
learning competencies at grade 4 through the School Improvement Plan as defined
by the National Curriculum Standards System and measured by the National
Learning Assessment.
27. The main strategies to achieve these results are capacity development,
advocacy, partnerships and knowledge management. Approaches include integrated
early childhood development, alternative basic education, service delivery linked to
the “whole woreda” approach, a multi-sectoral approach to gender-based violence
and child participation in learning, response to cli mate change through
environmental education, and education in emergencies.
28. Linkages with the community-based nutrition programme of the HEP will
accelerate children’s brain development, alertness and social interaction and
improve child nutrition, health and early learning. This will take place through
emotional stimulation (early childhood development) of children under 2
participating in monthly growth monitoring and promotion sessions.
29. The main interventions include: (a) support implementation o f national
policies and plans; (b) support partners at regional level to make better use of data
for evidence-based advocacy, resource mobilization, planning, implementation and
monitoring; (c) support communities and school management committees to
promote access for out-of-school children in disadvantaged areas and reduce
dropout rates, especially for girls; (d) improve learner performance for girls and
boys at the foundation level (ECD and grades 1 to 4); and (e) explore strategies to
increase access to quality general secondary education.
30. Protective environment and disaster risk reduction. This component will
contribute to building and strengthening an integrated child -focused social welfare
and protection system. It will support interventions that will ensure that the justice
system better serves and protects children, whether victims, witnesses or alleged

10

11-29707

offenders. It will strengthen youth empowerment and reduce HIV incidence among
the adolescents most at risk.
31. This programme component also supports interventions that address the causes
of vulnerability to disasters of women and children, as well as to disability,
violence, exploitation and abuse.
32. It will support achievement of the following UNDAF outcomes by 2015:
(a) women, youth and children are increasingly protected and rehabilitated from
abuse, violence, exploitation and discrimination; (b) national and subnational
institutions have implemented a minimum package of social protection measures in
accordance with a funded national action plan based on legislation; (c) national and
subnational institutions and vulnerable communities have systematically reduced
disaster risks and impacts and have improved food security; and (d) access has
improved to HIV prevention, treatment, care and suppor t.
33. The programme component will contribute to the following results at national
and regional levels: (a) an effective child-friendly justice system realized in all
regions; (b) the national child-focused social welfare system is strengthened and
social welfare services are available in all regions; (c) the national social protection
plan is operationalized; (d) a functional birth registration system in place;
(e) violence against women and children is prevented and mitigated; (f) access to
HIV prevention services has increased for marginalized children and adolescents;
(g) the National Youth Development Package is fully implemented; and (h) the
Government, communities and civil society support disaster risk reduction and
respond to emergencies in Ethiopia, with a particular focus on issues affecting
women and children in the most vulnerable regions/districts.
34. The following strategies will be used throughout the programme:
(a) enhancing technical capacities of government partners and counterparts for
policy and systems development and quality, sustainable service delivery;
(b) empowering families and communities with knowledge and skills to achieve a
stronger protective environment for boys and girls; (c) developing social change
mechanisms and increasing advocacy against harmful practices and violations;
(d) building and strengthening child protection systems at all levels; and
(e) increasing institutional capacity to adequately respond to emergencies.
35. Analysis, communication and participation. This component will facilitate
dialogue on policies, behaviours and social norms at federal and regional levels and
in some woredas and communities and on stakeholder duties to work towards
realization of children’s rights.
36. It supports the national development goal of good governance and democracy,
with communities empowered to take charge of their own development. It also
supports the following UNDAF outcomes: (a) national and subnational actors utilize
improved mechanisms that promote inclusiveness, participation, transparency,
accountability and responsiveness in national development processes, and (b) the
capacities of national, local and community institutions are strengthened for
evidence-based development management, including in disaggregated data
collection, analysis and utilization.
37.

The programme component will contribute to the following results:

11

(a) Policy dialogue and analysis are supported, and national and subnational
programmes that articulate the claims and duties of boys, girls and wo men (based on
the relevant international conventions) are developed, implemented and updated
periodically based on the latest available socio-economic data.
(b) National and subnational institutions, the mass media, community
networks, families, women and children participate more effectively in
communication for development, addressing behaviours, norms and actions to
protect, promote and fulfil the rights of girls, boys and women.
38. Strategies to achieve the results include strengthening national and regional
capacities to collect, analyse and report on trends and disparities related to boys and
girls; and development of standardized approaches, tools and training for social
change initiatives.
Major partnerships
39. In addition to the Government, UNICEF will work in close partnership with
United Nations agencies and multilateral and bilateral partners. Work with
international and national non-governmental organizations, media and civil society
groups will continue. As part of the resource mobilization strategy, close contact
will be maintained with bilateral and multilateral organizations and the National
Committees for UNICEF.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
40. All programme implementation will be coordinated by national instit utions,
under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Sectoral programmes
will be coordinated at federal and regional levels by relevant line ministries,
authorities and regional bureaus.
41. The capacity of government institutions to manage supply and logistics will
continue to be strengthened.
42. Monitoring within the UNDAF framework will be supported by quarterly
reviews by regional counterparts and mid-year and annual reviews led by the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Relevant counterparts and
partners will participate.
43. UNICEF will work with government institutions, in particular the Central
Statistics Agency, to ensure the availability, analysis and use of disaggregated data
at national, regional and woreda levels, and to promote the use of EthioInfo for
monitoring progress towards the GTP and Millennium Development Goals. The
Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, linked to the monitoring framework of
the UNDAF, will be the basis for monitoring progress.
44. Independent programme evaluations will be managed by the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Development following the Development Assistance
Committee guidelines of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.

12

11-29707

