Gabon
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Gabon
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.23) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)
Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight

0.6
69

(% moderate and severe, 2000)

8

(% urban/rural, poorest/richest)

7/12, 15/4

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

260 a
96/96 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2002)

69

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

87

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

33

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

5.2

Child work (%, children age 5-14)

—

Birth registration (%, children under age 5, 2000)
(% male/female, urban/rural,
poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

89
89/90, 90/87,
88/92
7 370 c

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

45 d

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

55 d

†

a

b

c
d

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.childinfo/
org/.
260 deaths per 100,000 live births is the adjusted estimate for 2008 by the Maternal
Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and World Bank,
together with independent technical experts) adjusted for under-reporting and
misclassification of maternal mortality. For more information, see the website
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey of 66% of schools. Source: Statistical Analysis Bulletin on Primary Education in
Gabon, 2008.
$12,460 (GNI per capita in PPP, 2009).
Owing to the lack of new surveys, estimates continue to be extrapolated from the 2000 surve y
(1999 birth cohort, linear extrapolation). WHO and UNICEF will also continue to recommend
that a high-quality survey should be conducted in Gabon in order to validate the current levels .

The situation of children and women
1.
Gabon, with an estimated population of 1.5 million, 50 per cent of whom are
young people, and with a high rate of urbanization (85 per cent), is a country of
paradoxes: it has low social indicators, but per capita income in purcha sing power
parity was estimated to be $12,460 in 2009 (Human Development Report of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)), making it one of richest
countries in sub-Saharan Africa. This income is unequally distributed: the wealthiest
quintile controls 50 per cent of national income while 33 per cent of the population
live below the national poverty line. 1 An analysis of equity and disparities in Gabon
shows that the most disadvantaged children come from the poorest groups, followed
by those living in rural areas, with no distinction as to sex. Given the country’s high
rate of urbanization, three quarters of those in poverty live in cities.
1

2

Gabonese Poverty Assessment Survey, 2005.

2.
The new president, who was elected in 2009, has developed a policy aimed at
making Gabon an emerging country by 2025; one of his strategic focuses is the
reduction of inequality, exclusion and poverty. Wide-ranging reforms are beginning
to be implemented in key sectors, particularly in the social sphere, and universal
health insurance that includes coverage for people with low incomes is currently
being phased in. Other limited social protection or assistance mechanisms exist that
could serve as a good basis for the development of social protection policies.
3.
It will be difficult to gauge the results of this policy and the progress achieved
because all sectors face a general lack of data (most of which dates back to 2000)
and weak statistical systems. The demographic and health survey now in progress
will fill crucial gaps in current data in the social sphere.
4.
According to the third national progress report on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) issued in 2010, Gabon has made uneven progress
towards achieving the MDGs. There is a high probability that goal 2 will be
attained, but the probability of achieving goals 3, 4 and 7 is still medium, while it is
low for goals 1, 5 and 6.
5.
The under-five mortality rate, estimated at 69 per 1,000 live births, is mainly
due to neonatal illnesses, acute respiratory infections, diarrhoea and malaria.
Malaria is no longer the primary cause of mortality thanks to the use of mosquito
nets and treatment, the rates of which rose, respectively, from 18 per cent to 55 per
cent and from 41.3 per cent to 48 per cent between 2006 and 2008. Vaccination
coverage remains relatively low. In 2009, immunization coverage for the combined
diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus (DPT3) vaccine was 76 per cent (according to
administrative data) and was estimated at 45 per cent according to extrapolation of
the data from the 2000 demographic and health survey, with significant disparities:
71 per cent of children from the richest families have been vaccinated against
measles, compared to 34 per cent from the poorest families, according to the 2000
survey. This situation appears to be linked to a health system that is overly hospitalcentric with highly vertical and unintegrated health programmes, compounded by
limited community participation in health care activities. All of this restricts access
to services; affordability in particular represents a ba rrier for the poorest. The
private and para-public sectors account for 17.5 per cent of health centres, which
operate independently of and parallel to the health information system. The low
quality of public services leads people to turn to these sectors d espite their limited
affordability.
6.
The Gabonese Government finances the bulk of the health care budget
(6.83 per cent of the national budget in 2009). Development partners in this
sphere — the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), the African Development Bank and the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria — tend to provide technical rather than
financial assistance.
7.
HIV prevalence was estimated at 5.2 per cent in 2009, ranging from 3 per cent
to 8.7 per cent depending on the province. The rate is estimated at 8.1 per cent
among pregnant women and rose from 3.6 per cent in 2007 to 4.8 per cent in 2009
among young people age 15 to 24. National coverage by services for the prevention
of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV remains low (48.5 per cent),
despite the fact that there is no charge for testing or for antiretroviral (ARV) drugs.
Early diagnosis and treatment for infants exposed to HIV remain at a nascent level.

3

8.
The net primary school enrolment rate is at 96 per cent, with parity between
the sexes, although the quality of the system is affected by internal performance
weaknesses, with relatively high rates of repetition. To address this situation, major
reforms resulting from the 2010 National Education Conference are under way.
These reforms are actively supported by multilateral and bilateral partners, first and
foremost Coopération française and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
9.
The principal challenges in the protection of children are linked to the
prevalence of real problems, such as trafficking in children (which requires a
regional approach) and violence against children, that are not fully understood in all
their dimensions; other problems, such as child work and children living on the
street, are on the rise.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results
10. The Gabon-UNICEF programme of cooperation contributed to the
development of the national Accelerated Child Survival Plan, together with an
investment plan developed through the marginal budgeting for bottlenecks tool. It
was incorporated into national health policy and the national Health Development
Plan. Immunization coverage has increased, rising from 38 per cent in 2006 to over
76 per cent in 2009, as a result of Government efforts through the “reach every
district” approach. No cases of measles, polio or yellow fever have been detected
since 2008. Through UNICEF advocacy and technical support and PMTCT, the four
areas of focus in UNICEF efforts on HIV/AIDS (prevention, care, treatment and
protection) have been included in the national HIV/AIDS strategic plan for 2008 2012 funded by the State and supported by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria.
11. The percentage of pregnant women tested for HIV rose from 8 per cent in 2007
to 48.5 per cent in 2010 and the percentage of HIV-positive women who have
received ARV treatment is estimated at 32 per cent. Two centres that provide
information and counselling to young people on sexuality, sexually transmitted
diseases and HIV/AIDS are operating through a partnership among the private
sector (Tullow Oil), the Ministry of Education and the non-governmental
organization (NGO) Lumière.
12. With funding from the Swiss UNICEF Committee, the capacities of every
school in the country have been strengthened using the competency-based approach,
through training for all teachers and access to teaching coaches. The education
statistics system has been revitalized at the central and provincial levels, as
evidenced by the production and distribution of annual statistical analysis bulletins
(2008 issued and 2009 in progress). These results have been achieved under the
coordination of the Ministry of Education and with the support of United Nations
agencies (UNESCO, UNFPA and the International Labour Organization (ILO)) and
the French Development Agency.
13. Through UNICEF advocacy and technical support, there has been significant
progress in legislation (adoption and implementation of laws): promulgation of the

4

law on sexual violence and female genital mutilation (2008), enactment of the law
on justice for minors (2010), a national manual of procedures on caring for child
victims of trafficking (2008) and ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (2010). The
capacities of care and reintegration facilities for children in difficulty have been
enhanced, resulting in the protection of 518 child victims of trafficking and the
repatriation of 420 of them to their countries of origin. The Economic Community
of Central African States has established a Child Protection Unit. Lastly, 94.3 per
cent of indigenous children from target villages received birth certificates in 2007.
14. Three studies funded by UNICEF have provided evidence to support enhanced
advocacy and dialogue in favour of children, the development of appropriate
investment policies and the allocation of adequate resources for basic social
services: a study on violence against children (2010), a budget analysis of child focused sectors (2009/2010) and a study on the developme nt of social policy in
Gabon (2010). The latter two studies established a causal relationship between
resource allocation policy, the quality and effectiveness of social expenditure and
the movement of social indicators in Gabon. They also revealed the ina dequate
coverage and lack of efficiency of existing initiatives, particularly for the most
vulnerable groups. They provided insights into ways of ensuring more efficient
budgetary policy, a higher level of funding for social sectors and a more coherent
and synergistic system of universal social protection. The recommendations derived
from these studies will be followed in the present cooperation programme.
15. As a result of advocacy conducted jointly with other technical and financial
partners for the updating of the 2000 data, a demographic and health survey is in the
start-up phase and other databases, such as the Integrated Management Information
System, are being consolidated. The updated data (the report will be completed by
the end of 2012) will contribute to better analysis of the situation of women and
children and the refinement of strategies for the programme of cooperation.
16. All of these results have been achieved through national coordination of
ministerial departments in charge of planning, health, social affairs, education,
justice and human rights and with the participation of youth groups, NGOs (Service
international de la formation des enfants de la rue et de la traite et exploitation des
orphelins déscolarisés (SIFOS), CARITAS Gabon and Mission Nissi) and
professional organizations. Close cooperation with United Nations agencies
(UNFPA, UNESCO, Joint and Co-sponsored United Nations Programme on HIV
and AIDS (UNAIDS), UNDP and WHO) made it possible to provide mainly
technical support, and to a lesser extent financial support, for certain supplementary
immunization activities funded primarily by the State and the Global Fund. UNICEF
supported social mobilization during vaccination campaigns and the mobilization of
private-sector partners (Marathon Oil and TOTAL Gabon) and its procurement hub
was used for the supply of inputs. Partnerships with the embassies of France and the
United States of America also contributed to the results.

5

Lessons learned
17. The programme achieved most of these results through two strategies:
(a) advocacy for progress on legislation on the protection of children and updating
of the statistics required to develop child-focused policies and strategic plans; and
(b) capacity-building for stakeholders in all areas of the programme. The next
programme will continue to focus on these strategies, based on more refined
analysis of the situation of children in terms of geographic, socio -economic and
gender disparities.
18. National implementation of the Accelerated Child Survival and Development
Strategy is well behind schedule. Significant progress might have been made if
high-impact interventions had been scaled up at the community level. Enhanced
capabilities for families and parents to prevent and manage common childhoo d
diseases, in conjunction with more effective action by the health care system, will
contribute significantly to reducing child morbidity and mortality.
19. The study on violence against children showed that most violence takes place
within the family, which underscores the need for activities that place a greater
focus on families and communities, particularly by raising awareness about the
rights of children, publicizing the laws and providing support and sensitization to
ensure that people resort to those laws.
20. In the effort to combat the trafficking of children, bilateral agreements
between Gabon (primarily a destination country) and other States, particularly in
Western Africa, should complement and strengthen the subregional agreements
between the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Advocacy, social policy and partnerships

1 500

2 000

3 500

Capacity-building for child survival, development
and protection

1 500

5 000

6 500

750

1 000

1 750

3 750

8 000

11 750

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
21. The country programme document was drawn up by all stakeholders
(Government, civil society and UNICEF), led by the Ministry of Economy, Trade,
Industry and Tourism. The initial stage consisted of further developing the analysis
of the situation of children and women carried out in 2009 while highlighting the
equity dimensions. Given the delay in drafting the new growth and poverty
reduction strategy paper, the Government agreed that the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) should be prepared on the basi s of

6

an economic and social policy letter that sets out the strategic direction for the
policy of emergence. The UNICEF country programme is guided by the Framework
in anticipation of contributing to the achievement of the UNDAF strategic outcomes
developed during the planning workshop held on 13-15 December 2010.
22. The selection criteria for the country programme priorities are the following:
acuteness/seriousness of the problem, gap to be addressed, value added by UNICEF,
complementarity with other agencies and focus on the most disadvantaged groups.
The present document was validated by the partners who prepared it, and by the
representatives of those engaged in multilateral and bilateral cooperation (including
France, Japan, Spain, the African Development Bank and the United Nations
system), during the workshop held on 21 January 2011.
Programme and results of components and strategies
23. The Gabon-UNICEF programme of cooperation 2012-2016 will help to
accelerate achievement of the MDGs and the implementation of national policies
and priorities on accelerated child survival and combating inequality and exclusion.
It will contribute to a better balance of economic and social indicators by giving
children higher priority in the national development a genda and by strengthening
the capacities of institutions that provide services to families in order to enable the
full realization of children’s and women’s rights. In view of the priority challenges
facing children and the organization’s limited resource s, it has been agreed with the
Government that the focus should be on the most promising interventions that have
the greatest impact on children. The programme therefore focuses on the themes of
the survival and development of children and adolescents and the protection of
children against all forms of violence, which will be supported by the development
of social policy for children.
24. The main results expected from this cooperation by the end of 2016 are the
following:
(a) Social policies as well as advocacy mechanisms and partnerships for the
benefit of children, particularly the most disadvantaged, have been developed and
implemented, and the resources allocated to the relevant priority social sectors are
increased and better utilized; and
(b) Children, particularly the most disadvantaged, and their mothers receive a
minimum package of appropriate advocacy, prevention and treatment services aimed
at improving their survival, development and protection, including in emergency
situations.
25. Advocacy and partnership are the main cross-cutting strategies that will
support the achievement of results in the first programme component. By producing
evidence to underpin advocacy, these strategies will aim to: (a) influence the
adoption of inclusive social protection policies and strategies for the poorest and
most disadvantaged children; (b) ensure that national strategic plans and
programmes place greater emphasis on reducing inequalities; (c) encourage
budgetary allocations to social sectors, particularly he alth, education and social
protection; (d) guide strategic resource allocation, particularly in the area of health,
reduce the level of resources going to hospitals and increase resources for primary
health care; (e) influence the scaling-up of high-impact interventions for child

7

survival and protection; and (f) develop a more woman- and child-friendly legal and
social environment.
26. Given the overall sparseness of data, the programme will support the
continuous updating of statistical data (particularly on children) to promote better
understanding of the situation of children and to support advocacy and planning.
Lastly, collaboration with other United Nations system agencies will be enhanced
through joint programmes and thematic clusters.
27. The main strategy for the second component of the programme is
strengthening the capacities of children, families and communities to assert their
rights, the capacities of national authorities to fulfil their obligations and the
capacities of other stakeholders to identify priorities for action, taking into account
the gender, disparities and vulnerability of the most disadvantaged children. At the
same time, the programme will support strategies aimed at communication for
development, with particular emphasis on improving family practices crucial to
child survival and on civil society participation in altering behaviour and social
norms.
28. The programme will be national in scope with a focus on the most
disadvantaged areas, particularly the suburbs of large cities ( Libreville, Port-Gentil
and Franceville), which are home to large numbers of people living in precarious
conditions.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
29. The programme of cooperation will contribute to the achievement of the
national results set out in the economic and social policy letter, the action plans of
the national programme on good governance, the national policy on health, the
national health development plan, the national HIV/AIDS strategic plan and the
national gender strategy. The programme results will contribute to the achievement
of five of the six UNDAF strategic outcomes.
Relationship to international priorities
30. The programme results are aligned with the Millennium Declaration and the
Millennium Development Goals, with a focus on equity. They also take into account
the guidelines of the 2006-2013 UNICEF medium-term strategic plan. The
programme will help develop the country’s capacities to respect, protect and
promote the rights of children and women as set out in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. It is also in line with the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness and the Third High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness (Accra HighLevel Forum).
Programme components
31. The programme will support the design and implementation of the national
poverty reduction strategy. It will have two programme components.
32. The advocacy, social policy and partnerships component will support the
implementation of the strategic focus contained in the vision of the Head of State on
combating inequality, poverty and exclusion. It will promote the development of
strategies and policies aimed at ensuring better allocation of r esources to priority

8

social sectors and better intra-sectoral distribution of budgets. It will support the
development of the national system of disaggregated statistical information on
children and will ensure the promotion and protection of children’s ri ghts at all
levels of society. It will also support the updating of a legal framework that is
harmonized with the international instruments ratified by the country.
33. The programme will achieve these results by promoting: (a) the development
of the national goals on reducing disparities and countering exclusion and their
effective inclusion in the design and implementation of national development
strategies and in public expenditure analysis, with the aim of increasing budget
allocations for priority social sectors and achieving more effective distribution of
budgets within sectors; (b) the development of a child -sensitive social protection
floor fuelled by the production of evidence and the strengthening of national
capacity; and (c) the regular collection and analysis of quality data on children and
women with an emphasis on living conditions, poverty, disparities, exclusion and
gender.
34. In addition, strategies on evidence-based advocacy and resource mobilization
will be implemented and partnerships will be established to promote the survival,
development and protection of children in the most disadvantaged urban and rural
areas.
35. The aim of the capacity-building for child survival, development and
protection component is to strengthen the capacities of families, service providers
and policymakers in the areas of child survival and protection. This component will
involve ensuring that children, particularly the most disadvantaged, and their
mothers receive a minimum package of appropriate advocacy, prevention and
treatment services aimed at improving their survival, development and protection,
both in ordinary circumstances and in emergency situations. This will be achieved
by supporting national institutions (such as the Ministry of Health) in a revie w of
improvements to the mechanisms and systems through which services are provided
to the poorest children, analysis of budgets to achieve more effective budgetary
allocations, and support for capacity-building. Strategies on communication for
development will also be implemented to develop knowledge and practices among
families and communities that promote better child survival and to promote changes
in behaviour and norms within society.
36. More specifically, the following outcomes are expected: all chi ldren under the
age of one are properly vaccinated in accordance with the routine immunization
schedule, regardless of location, including in emergency situations; at least 80 per
cent of children under the age of five receive proper care as soon as the fi rst
symptoms of diarrhoea, acute respiratory infections or malaria appear; 50 per cent
of families are convinced of the effectiveness of the four key family practices for
child survival and are using them; 80 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women have
received ARV drugs for PMTCT; 60 per cent of HIV-positive children age 0 to 14
eligible for ARV treatment have received it; 80 per cent of young people age 10 to
24 engage in responsible behaviour to protect themselves from HIV.
37. Support will be provided to the Government for the establishment of a
comprehensive national child protection system that will include a minimum
package of integrated services.

9

38. Cross-sectoral costs will support overall implementation of the programme
and, in particular, operational and logistical aspects as well as some general
programme costs.
Major partnerships
39. Partnership with the private sector, and particularly with large companies, will
be developed and expanded. Coupled with State resources, the funding mobilized
will be crucial to strengthening the technical capacities of service providers and
promoting key practices for child survival and protection within families and
communities. Strategic alliances and regular contact will be continued and
strengthened with donors, media, NGOs, religious and other influential groups,
grass-roots organizations and Government counterparts. This strategic partnership
and the alliances formed will provide important support to our advocacy for a
decent environment for children.
40. Collaboration with United Nations agencies will be undertaken within the
UNDAF. The office’s involvement in joint programmes of support for the
Government by the United Nations system (particularly in the area of HIV/AIDS)
will be continued and encouraged.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
41. The Ministry of Economy, Trade, Industry and Tourism, through the
Directorate for Comprehensive Planning, is the national coordinating body for the
programme of cooperation. The Directorate organizes all periodic reviews of the
programme of cooperation and coordinates joint programming with the United
Nations system. Coordination of monitoring, research and evaluation for the country
programme will be conducted under a five-year integrated monitoring and
evaluation plan. The plan will be implemented on the basis of a multi -year budget
approved by the country office management team.
42. UNICEF will support its partners in the implementation of the programme of
cooperation through rolling work plans. Opportunities and obstacles to the
achievement of outcomes will be identified annually by means of a logical
framework. This procedure will make it possible to identify the critical determinants
that the programme must affect to have a significant impact on the situation of
children and women throughout the programme cycle. The mid -term review of the
programme of cooperation will be conducted in 2014.

10

