The Republic of Gambia
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for the Republic of
Gambia (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.24) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session
(20-23 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.8

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

103

Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2005-2006)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2001)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

16
11/18, 21/10 a
730 b
60/62 c
70 d

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

92

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

67

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2005-2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

2
25
55
57/53, 57/54, 52/64
440

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

98

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

96

†

a
b

c
d

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Disparity source: MICS 2005/2006, re-analysed by UNICEF Headquarters, November 2007.
400 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together wi th
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data Centre, June 2010.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Over 60 per cent of Gambians live in poverty. Women constitute 63 per cent of
the poor, and 76 per cent of all the poor live in rural areas. Approximately 530,000
children and youth are characterized as poor. 1 Lack of access to basic social services
for a large part of the population increases the depth of poverty, especially in rural
areas; the disparities that are evident within and across regions, both in rural and
urban settings, have an adverse impact on health, education, and child protection.
However, the country is progressing slowly towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals; it has nearly reached universal coverage for vaccinations and
safe water supply, but children’s health and women’s health remain a challenge, and
mortality rates are not declining fast enough to meet the health -related targets for
2015.

__________________
1

2

UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Children and Women, 2010.

2.
In 2010, under-five mortality rates in the rural areas were 36 per cent higher
than that in urban areas; the major causes were malari a, pneumonia, and diarrhoeal
diseases. 2 Maternal mortality rates are high, at 730 per 100,000 live births, with
rates in rural areas almost double those of urban areas. The prevalence rates of
underweight children are much higher in rural areas than in urb an areas, and the
three poorest regions have the highest rates of malnourished children. Unequal
access to health within and across the regions depends on the levels of geographical
access to health facilities and poverty levels of the families. Stunting l evels reached
22.4 per cent, with wasting and underweight levels at 6.4 per cent and 20.3 per cent,
respectively. In one of the eastern regions, Central River Region, the proportion of
births attended by skilled personnel has increased slightly, from 28 pe r cent in 2005
to 32 per cent in 2010. 3 There has been some progress in fighting infectious
diseases, including tuberculosis and malaria, and the country’s Millennium
Development Goals report indicates that HIV-1 prevalence rates have been halved,
from 2.8 per cent in 2005 to 1.6 per cent in 2008. The Government has expanded the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV services into routine
reproductive health and child health outreach services so that all HIV-positive
mothers can access antiretroviral therapy. However, the services are not reaching the
most disadvantaged women who, due to poverty and lack of access to health
facilities, often deliver at home. 4
3.
The country will not meet the sanitation targets for the Millennium
Development Goals. In 2010, over 548,000 people — some 33 per cent of the
population — lived without access to improved sanitation. Sanitary disposal of
excreta is more advanced in urban areas (93 per cent) than in the rural areas (78 per
cent), and an even greater divide exists between the richest (97 per cent) and the
poorest households (56 per cent). None of the households in the poorest quintiles
have access to water, while 81 per cent of the wealthiest households do. 5
4.
In education, there are still major gaps in reaching the most disadvantaged
children. In 2010, some 31.6 per cent of children aged 7 -15 years were out of
school. 6 The most disadvantaged children are in the eastern parts of the country,
where a poor girl has virtually no chance of completing prima ry education. Nearly
half of the education costs have to be funded by household resources, representing a
significant burden on families.
5.
Implementation of the Children’s Act has been weak, and so far efforts have
focused mainly in and around the capital. In 2005, one in four children was engaged
in child labour, some 13 per cent under the age of 18 were orphans, and 84 per cent
of children under 14 years were subjected to psychological or physical punishment,
with 22 per cent subjected to severe physical punishment. Preliminary data indicate
that some of those indicators have worsened in the last five years. Sexual abuse and
exploitation of children is an acknowledged problem, but the formal child protection
system is weak and not equitably accessible to all children. Only half of the children
__________________
2
3

4
5
6

Ibid.
Unless otherwise stated, all data for 2005 is from the third round of the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey (MICS3); the 2010 figures are preliminary data from MICS4.
In 2005, 45.5 per cent of women delivered at home; the figure was 50.3 per cent in 2010.
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, 2010 update.
Gambian Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education/World Bank/UNESCO, Country Status
Report, 2010.

3

under the age of five have a birth certificate, a trend that has stagnated for the last
five years.
6.
Gender inequities are evident, particularly for rural women, who do not have
equal access to quality health care, post primary education, opportunities for
income-generating activities and input into local decision-making. Even familyplanning decisions are not in their control. Female genital cutting remains a
significant problem; in 2005, 78 per cent of women aged 15-49 years reported
having undergone the practice.

Key results and lessons learned from the previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
7.
The country programme has contributed to a number of results at the country
level, especially in the Upper River Region, where interventions have been
concentrated. Nationwide, since 2005, the country has seen a decline in infant and
under-five child mortality rates in all regions. The proportion of the population
using improved drinking water sources has risen from 84 per cent in 2000 to 92 per
cent in 2008, and the use of adequate sanitation facilities have also increased, from
63 per cent in 2000 to 67 per cent in 2008. 7
8.
National policies on nutrition, health, sanitation and PMTCT have been
developed with UNICEF support, and almost all HIV-positive mothers in the Upper
River Region received antiretroviral therapy for PMTCT as planned in 2005. In
2009, immunization coverage for measles and other diseases was almost universal.
The support of UNICEF to immunization programmes, together with the World
Health Organization (WHO), has made a difference.
9.
In education, UNICEF in partnership with the Regional Education Directorate,
contributed to an increase in net enrolment rates, from 42 per cent in 20 07 to 53 per
cent in 2010, in the Upper River Region. UNICEF also supported early childhood
development, with enrolments rising nationwide, from 21.4 per cent in 2005 to
36.4 per cent in 2010. 8 For the past nine years, UNICEF has provided leadership in
the coordination of in-country donors and preparation of funding proposals; this
resulted in the leveraging of $41.4 million in grants from the Education for All Fast track Initiative Catalytic Fund.
10. For the first time, Gambian community child protection committees have been
established nationwide — with a current total of 20 — in order to enhance
community responsibility in the protection of their children. The Tostan 9 community
empowerment programme for the abandonment of female genital cutting has
reached 30 per cent of all communities in the region, resulting in a decline in the
number of women who believe the practice should continue, from 92.2 per cent in
2005 to 72.6 per cent in 2010. Awareness of the harmfulness of these traditional
__________________
7
8

9

4

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, 2010 update.
Gambian Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education/World Bank/UNESCO, Country Status
Report, 2010.
Tostan, which means “breakthrough” in the Wolof language, is a West African NGO that seeks
to empower communities for sustainable development by helping them to participate and
implement their own projects at community levels.

practices for girls, and some initial behaviour change efforts, are at the core of this
result.
11. GamInfo has been established with support from UNICEF, providing web enabled access to harmonized development data to measure and report on the
progress of children. The tool currently has 437 indicators and over 10,000 data
values.
Lessons learned
12. The previous country programme had both a national and an area focus.
Following the midterm review in 2009, three regional areas were consolidated into
one, the Upper River Region, which comprises 16 per cent of the population. Efforts
and resources were thus concentrated in that key region, and project planning,
implementation, and monitoring were coordinated at the regional level, using a
multisectoral approach. Preliminary data from 2010 show that several health,
education, and child protection indicators have improved in this region. As a result,
this coordinated and integrated approach will be expanded to the district level.
13. The more integrated the health services, the higher the chances are that a
woman and her child can get comprehensive attention and care. The country office
supported the health centres to provide the antenatal and postnatal care. Birth
registration support and knowledge on key care practices were provided through
public health officers, both in the reproductive and child health units and in the
communities. The programme will continue to provide capacity development to
health personnel and public health officers, combined with strengthened effo rts at
the community level, using communication for development, to improve care
practices and skills. The education and child protection components will also benefit
from communication for development to address social norms that often promote
harmful traditional practices as well as prevent girls from attending school and
continuing their education.
14. The 2009 midterm review recommended the creation of a social policy
programme to strengthen the capacity of the Government and other partners in
designing and implementing pro-poor policies. This includes allocation of budgets
and equitable expenditures in social sectors, as well as improved data collection
methods and quality analysis, in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women while placing child rights issues in national public discourses.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Young child survival and development

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 628

5 026

6 654

Basic education

850

3 000

3 850

Child protection

1 000

5 000

6 000

Social policy, knowledge, and advocacy for
children’s rights

1 005

1 500

2 505

5

Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

872

474

1 346

5 355

15 000

20 355

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
15. The country programme preparation process commenced with the 2009
midterm review and involved the Government, United Nations agencies, civil
society representatives, and children and women stakeholders. This was followed by
a series of meetings with senior officials from all social sectors to identify
opportunities for the next period of cooperation. The design of the programme took
into consideration the key findings of the 2010 situation analysis of children and
women. The common country assessment for the United Nations Development
Framework (UNDAF) was validated in 2011 and was also used to inform the
programme. A prioritization workshop took place in January 2011, and the UND AF
results matrix was completed in March 2011.
Programme component results and strategies
16. The country programme aims to advance the realization of children ’s rights in
the country, and will consist of four components — young child survival and
development; basic education; child protection; and social policy, knowledge and
advocacy. The programme supports a rights-based approach which recognizes
people as key actors in their own development and also mainstreams gender
equality, with many of the interventions aiming at women and the girl child.
Environmental sustainability has been taken into account, especially in areas related
to education and water, sanitation and hygiene. Cross-sectoral support for supplies
procurement, overall management, and operations will also be provided. All the
programme component results have been designed based on a set of assumed risks.
17. In young child survival and development, the programme will achieve the
following results by 2016: (a) women and children in the most vulnerable districts
have access to quality maternal and child health services, including nutrition,
PMTCT, and water, sanitation and hygiene, especially during emergencies; and
(b) an increased number of mothers and caregivers in the most vulnerable dis tricts
have adopted essential care practices for young child survival and development.
18. In basic education, it will achieve the following results: (a) improved quality
of education in 40 per cent of lower primary schools in the most vulnerable district s
nationwide; and (b) enrolment and completion rates in lower primary schools,
particularly for girls in rural districts, reach 70 per cent and 30 per cent,
respectively, in Central River Region and Upper River Region.
19. In child protection, the programme will achieve the following results:
(a) children in the most vulnerable districts have access to functioning child protection
systems and services that protect them from violence, abuse, and exploitation; and
(b) children and women are benefiting from significantly reduced levels of violence,
exploitation, and abuse as a result of positive changes in gender and social norms.
20. In social policy, knowledge, and advocacy, the programme will achieve the
following results: (a) national capacities strengt hened to design and implement

6

child-friendly policies, legislative measures and budgets; and (b) government
capacity strengthened to collect, analyse and use data to inform policy and decision
makers and conduct evaluations on policies and programmes.
21. The main strategies utilized to achieve the target results will be a combination
of capacity development and communication for development across all four
programme components, and support to service delivery, especially in the
components for child protection and for young child survival and development. A
district-based approach for all interventions will be applied in an integrated manner
in all target districts. All programme components will have an upstream element that
will make use of effective advocacy, knowledge management, and strategic
partnerships. The social policy programme will also partner with other countries in
the region, in particular with Senegal, on studies related to child poverty,
vulnerability, deprivations, and cross-border issues.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
22. The country programme is fully aligned with the national long -term
development plan, Vision 2020 and the medium-term plan, Programme for
Accelerated Growth and Employment, 2012-2015, which reflect the commitment of
the Government to the Millennium Development Goals. In addition, the programme
fully reflects the contribution of UNICEF to the three pillars of the UNDAF 2012 2016: poverty reduction and social protection; basic social services; and govern ance
and human rights. Individual programme components are also guided by the
national policies and strategies in the corresponding social sectors.
Relationship to international priorities
23. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Ri ghts of the
Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and other major human rights treaties. Objectives and strategic approaches
are consistent with the Millennium Development Goals, which are the basis for the
national planning papers prepared by the Government of the Gambia for the period
2012-2015. Programme component results correspond to all five focus areas of the
UNICEF medium term strategic plan 2006-2013.
Programme components
24. Young child survival and development. This programme component will
contribute to key interventions at the policy level, in collaboration with other United
Nations agencies, especially WHO, and local and international non -governmental
organizations (NGOs). The programme will support an increased coverage of
services for children and women and also improved practices by caregivers in the
family and in the community. It will provide technical support and capacity
development to the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, the National Nutrition
Agency, the National AIDS Council, the National Malaria Control Agency and the
Department of Water Resources. Capacity development on strategic planning, data
collection and research will be at the core of this intervention.
25. To support access to quality health services for women and children, it will
support improvements in the capacity of the health personnel in antenatal care,
delivery, and postpartum, as well as the integrated management of neonatal and
child illnesses, and the management of common childhood diseases at health facility

7

and community levels. Supplies and logistic support will be provided to improve the
services. Routine and integrated supplemental immunization, including new
vaccines and vitamin A supplementation for children under the age of five and postpartum mothers, will be a key intervention. Support will also be provided to
PMTCT and paediatric care for infected babies.
26. To improve the capacities of caregivers, mothers, families and communities to
adopt essential care practices, the component will support the scale -up of the
Community-led Total Sanitation strategy and use communication for development in
support of programme results: adoption of hand-washing practices; household water
treatment; use of insecticide-treated nets for pregnant women and children under the
age of five; preparation and use of oral rehydration salts for diarrhoeal cases; and
promotion of exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life. A nutrition
component will ensure micronutrient supplementation, including iron for pregnant
women, deworming interventions as well as promotion of salt iodization.
27. In light of the yearly floods, UNICEF will support emergency response to
address safe water supplies and prevent cholera outbreaks as well as continue to
advocate disaster risk reduction with the National Disaster Management Agency. It
will contribute to building national and community capacities to mitigate and
respond to disease outbreaks following flooding.
28. Programme coordination with all partners will be ensured through existing
technical working groups on primary health care, under the leadership of the
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. During emergencies, internal coordination at
the United Nations level will be guided by the World Food Programme (WFP), the
lead agency for the response during emergencies, and with national counterparts
according to national coordination mechanisms.
29. Basic education. This component will contribute to the national education
strategic plan and policies, focusing on improving access and quality of education in
the most vulnerable areas of the country and addressing disparities between rural
and urban areas, gender, and economic groups. Programme coordination will be
ensured by the Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education and the donor
coordination group, co-chaired by WFP.
30. To increase school access of children, and especially girls, in the most
vulnerable areas, it will embark on communication for development activities
through “mothers’ clubs”, voluntary associations of women at community level,
linked to the child-friendly schools, which can influence attitudes of families and
communities towards education and encourage parents to send their children,
especially girls, to school. Modalities of cash transfers for the poorest to access
schools will be explored. At the same time, UNICEF will support classroom
construction in the most vulnerable areas in need of school space. The promotion of
early childhood development to ensure school readiness includes curriculum
development and training of facilitators at early childhood centres. At the
community level, focus will be on parental education thr ough the village support
groups. 10 These groups work towards the promotion of exclusive breastfeeding,
__________________
10

8

Village support groups are community structures comprising eight key members of the
community, including the village health worker, the traditional birth attendant, the village
development committee chair.

maternal and child nutrition, water and sanitation issues, cognitive and psychosocial
development, and child protection matters.
31. To improve the quality of education in the most vulnerable areas of the
country, the component will provide in-service teacher training on child-centred
teaching methodologies and early-grade reading to teachers in the most vulnerable
areas of the country. This will be complemented by a curriculum review for lower
primary schools and supply of learning and teaching materials to the most
vulnerable schools. Interventions to improve the quality of the school environment
will include construction of water and sanitation facilities in schools, especially in
the most vulnerable districts. In collaboration with WFP and other institutions,
deworming activities will take place as well as initiatives to ensure better health and
nutrition of the learners, including life skills for HIV prevention. The quality of
school management and monitoring will be addressed, and support will b e provided
to improve the capacities of the school community for monitoring of learning
achievements.
32. Child protection. This component will focus on strengthening child protection
systems and services to protect children and women in the most vulnerabl e districts.
It will address gender and social norms to enhance the protective role of families
and communities, and to reduce violence, exploitation and abuse of children and
women.
33. To strengthen the child protection systems and services, it will prov ide
capacity development to the Department of Social Welfare to implement and roll out
the community child protection committees, aimed at reaching the most vulnerable
districts in the country. The participation of civil society in the committees will
ensure sustainability. Support will be provided to the reproductive and child health
unit in the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare to ensure the expansion of birth
registration for all children in the country. UNICEF will support government
partners in strengthening their monitoring and evaluation systems. The component
will help to build alliances towards a child protection system that begins with the
family and the community, and involves all social sectors including the justice
system. To ensure access to health and education, specific support will be provided,
in collaboration with local NGOs, to orphans and the most vulnerable children,
particularly in the eastern part of the country.
34. To ensure changes in gender and social norms and to reduce violen ce against
children and women, the component will support the expansion of the community
empowerment programme, in collaboration with Tostan. Raising awareness on the
importance of adolescent girls attending school and on harmful traditional practices,
such as female genital cutting, early marriage and gender-based violence, will be a
core effort, to be conducted in collaboration with the education sector and the
Women’s Bureau, a department under the Office of the Vice President in charge of
women’s issues. The Department of Social Welfare will coordinate the programme
with NGO partners in biannual review meetings, while the Women ’s Bureau will
coordinate on issues of female genital cutting.
35. Social policy, knowledge, and advocacy. This component will help to
strengthen the capacity of the Government and other partners in designing,
implementing and allocating budgets and to ensure quality expenditures, especially
in the health and education sectors, to be conducted in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme and civil society organizations. It will also

9

support quality research, in partnership with the University of the Gambia. Surveys,
such as the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and the Demographic and Health
Survey, will be conducted, in collaboration with the Gambia Bureau of Statistics, to
provide evidence on equity, gender and human rights disparities, and to inform
policies and decision-making in social protection, health, education, and child
protection.
36. Support will be provided to initiate a national dialogue on social protection
systems for the poorest families and children. Monitoring of social expenditures will
be conducted in partnership with local NGOs and advocacy groups. It will also
embark on advocacy campaigns to promote children’s and women’s rights as well as
capacity building of civil society organizations, adolescents, and decentralized local
government authorities in budgetary analysis and tracking, with a view to form a
strong pro-poor budget advocacy platform.
37. Information on children and women’s rights will be disseminated to promote
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, particularly through the strengthening of
media relations and publication of articles, press releases, and statements by the
representative and other staff. Resource mobilization efforts will be strengthened
through the website, development of resource mobilization packages and human
interest stories, provision of support to donor reporting and proposals, and
coordination of donor and national committee visits. Programme coordination will
be ensured by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs and the newly created
donor coordination unit, in coordination with the Office of the Resident
Coordinator.
38. Cross-sectoral costs will provide operational support to overall coordination
and management of the country programme, and include elements of supply and
procurement, monitoring and evaluation, assurance activities, key staff salaries and
operating costs.
Major partnerships
39. The country programme will strengthen existing partnerships with government
ministries and agencies, and collaborate with multilateral and bilateral agencies,
NGOs and civil society organizations, as well as young people and children, in the
implementation of its various components. Such partnerships will be intensified
through sectoral and thematic consultations. Cooperation with United Nations
agencies will be strengthened within the UNDAF framework for programming and
joint programmes.
40. The programme will also seek to work with a range of partners: the World
Bank; the European Union; the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria; the GAVI Alliance; and the Education for All Fast-track Initiative. UNICEF
will seek to maintain and expand partnerships with the national committees of the
Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
Monitoring, evaluation, and programme management
41. The Policy Analysis Unit, under the Office of the President, will assume
overall coordination of the country programme, in collaboration with the donor
coordination unit in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, while delegating
the coordination of programme components to line ministries and departments.

10

42. The programme will be closely monitored through quarterly joint field
monitoring visits, reports from implementing partners and updates on the key
indicators proposed in the summary result matrix, using the GamInfo database and
in partnership with the Gambia Bureau of Statistics. The GamInfo data base will be
updated regularly and used to prepare annual reports and reviews on national
strategic documents and on the Millennium Development Goals. An integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan will be developed together with United Nations
agencies and other partners as part of the UNDAF, and will include at least one
major evaluation in the areas of young child survival and development, basic
education and child protection, with a focus on equity and disparities. To the extent
possible, reviews of the country programme will be conducted through UNDAF
processes.

11

