Georgia
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Georgia
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.4) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 annual session (1-4 June
2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

Basic data †
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

1.0

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

30

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)

2a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2007)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2004)

23 b
95/92
100

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

99

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

93

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2007)

0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)

18

GNI per capita (US$)

2 470

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

92

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

96

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org.
a
WHO child growth standard.
b
The 2005 MMR estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank is 66 per
100,000 live births, which is adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Georgia has made substantial progress in promoting goo d governance,
strengthened institutions and economic growth. The country has enjoyed growth in
real gross domestic product (GDP) of up to 7.8 per cent per year, reaching a gross
national income per capita of $2,470 in 2008, compared with $1,060 in 2004.
2.
The global economic crisis and the 2008 armed conflict resulted in an
economic contraction of 10 per cent during the first two quarters of 2009. Since
then, the economy has slowly begun to recover but overall is projected to experience
negative growth. Both foreign direct investment and remittances declined.
Unemployment increased from 13.3 per cent in 2007 to 16.5 per cent in 2008 and
disproportionately affected young people, who as a group experienced more than
double the national average unemployment rate. The 2008 armed conflict made an
impact far beyond the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia, 1 leading to
significant displacements. Approximately 30,000 remain internally displaced to
date. International donor pledges in the aftermath of the armed conflict have been
important contributions to the Government in responding to these challenges.
3.
Georgia has made significant improvement towards realizing the rights of its
children over the last five years. Progress is evident in the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. For example, according to United Nations
__________________
1

2

United Nations General Assembly resolution 63/307 of 9 September 2009, entitled “Status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.

estimates, the under-five mortality rate fell from 47 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to
30 per 1,000 live births in 2008. The neonatal mortality rate fell from 41 to 26 in the
same time period. A similar positive trend has been noted with the maternal
mortality ratio. According to national statistics, the country is on track to achieve
universal primary education and ensure access to safe drinking water and adequate
sanitary facilities.
4.
Despite recent economic growth, a significant proportion of the population
lives below the poverty line. The 2009 World Bank Poverty Assessment found that
23.7 per cent of the Georgian population was poor and 9.3 per cent was extremely
poor. Among children, poverty levels are higher than the national average (28 per
cent), corresponding to 280,000 children. Families with four or more children are
especially vulnerable: they experience more widespread (44 per cent are poor) and
severe poverty. The effects of the global economic crisis and the 2008 armed
conflict are difficult to assess with regard to child poverty. However, the 2009
Poverty Assessment forecasts the total poverty rate to rise from 23.7 per cent to
27.1 per cent. The number of people benefiting from the Targeted Social Assistance
Program increased from 400,000 to 460,000 between January and June 2009. Major
reform of the social protection system is under way, with a particular emphasis on
expanding the coverage of means-tested social assistance and linking it to other
benefits such as health-care vouchers. While there are encouraging signs of more
resources being channelled to poor households through the targeted social assistance
scheme which began in 2006, a major effort is required to stren gthen the social
protection system’s capacity to encompass all of the vulnerable population.
5.
More can be done to further advance the agenda for children. In addition to the
overarching issue of child poverty there are two additional interlinked challen ges to
the fulfilment of the rights of children and women: social inclusion and gaps in
systems and capacities in service delivery.
6.
Social inclusion remains a significant challenge. In its 2008 concluding
observations, the Committee on the Rights of the Child noted that despite
Constitutional and other guarantees, the principle of non-discrimination is not fully
respected in practice for certain groups of children. These groups include children
belonging to minorities, children with disabilities, refugee - and asylum-seeking
children, children who are internally displaced, children of disadvantaged families,
children who live or work on the street, children in the juvenile justice system, and
children living in rural or remote areas. As an example of the r ural-urban disparity:
the proportion of people in poverty in rural areas was 30 per cent compared to 18
per cent in urban areas. The urban-rural gap in early childhood education has
increased. Nearly two thirds of urban children 3 -4 years old attend pre-school,
compared to only a quarter of rural children. Children with Azeri ethnicity have
about twice the mortality level of children with Georgian ethnicity.
7.
The significant stigma and discrimination surrounding children with
disabilities contribute to their systematic exclusion and isolation. Only 7 per cent of
pre-schools have any children with special needs. There are no data available on
causes of disability in Georgia, and there is a legacy of incorrect diagnosis at birth,
dating from an earlier period when Georgia was part of the Soviet Union. This is
now being addressed through capacity development under the leadership of the
Child Development Centre, which was opened in 2008. Children with disabilities

3

who do have access to learning are often separated from other children in
mainstream schools.
8.
The number of children living in institutions has fallen significantly, from
5,200 in 2004 to 2,300 in 2008. An additional 1,200 children are estimated to live in
private institutions run by non-governmental organizations and the Georgian
Orthodox church. Ninety per cent of children in residential institutions have a
surviving parent. The main causes for admission are poverty and disability. There is
no national child protection referral mechanism. Social workers are growing in
number, but there are still too few of them and they lack adequate training. It is
estimated that in the four largest cities, 1,050 children live and/or work on the
streets, almost all of them boys. Approximately 60 per cent of such c hildren in
Tbilisi are of Roma origin. Related protection issues are domestic and gender-based
violence and violence against children in schools.
9.
Georgia has a low incidence and prevalence of HIV/AIDS, with the estimated
HIV prevalence rate at 0.1 per cent among adults aged 15-49. Official statistics
reported 2,005 HIV infections at the end of 2009. In 2008, UNAIDS estimated that
the actual number of cases was 4,000. Injecting drug users account for 59.7 per cent
of infections. Almost two thirds of Georgia’s estimated 40,000 injecting drug users
began using drugs between 15 to 19 years of age. The Georgian Government has
developed a multisectoral national response to HIV/AIDS, supported by the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
10. The second major challenge consists of gaps in systems and capacities in
service delivery. Overall, social-sector budget allocations remain insufficient: only
1.6 per cent of GDP is allocated to health and 2.8 per cent to education. To improve
health outcomes, increased emphasis is needed on public health and nutrition, health
promotion and communication, and disease prevention. Although access to basic
health facilities by geographic area is good and a significant proportion of the poor
population is covered through national health benefits and/or medical vouchers
(673,000 in 2007, increasing to 900,000 in 2009), three quarters of the total
population is not covered by any form of health insurance. Increasing out -of-pocket
payments for health care represent a barrier to basic health services. In order to
further reduce infant mortality, additional efforts are required to ensure quality
neonatal services. Micronutrient deficiencies are prevalent.
11. Georgia has a strong education tradition with high primary and secondary
enrolment ratios and high literacy rates. However, the pre -school attendance rate is
only 49 per cent. Children who do not attend pre-school have a higher risk of not
reaching their full potential and are at greater risk of experiencing learning
difficulties, violence and social problems. The quality of education remains a
challenge. Several recent studies show that primary school children in Georgia have
comparatively low learning achievement in reading, mathematics and science,
including in relation to other children in the region. A major challenge for the
Government is to ensure the education system adequately prepares young people for
the labour market and to contribute to increased youth employment.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2010
Key results achieved
12. The main goal of the 2006-2010 programme of cooperation was to strengthen
national reform processes as well as contribute to the realization of children’s rights
to grow up healthy and well nourished in a caring, nurturing and inclusive family
environment.
13. The Government has implemented extensive health system reforms. For
example, in 2007, amendments to the 1997 Law on Health Care were introduced to
ensure compliance of services to evidence-based clinical guidelines and protocols
which corresponded to international norms. These amendments were introduced
with support from the European Commission, the World Bank, and the World Health
Organization (WHO), with UNICEF focusing on perinatal health. In 2010, the
Government, UNICEF and Reproductive Health Council established a strategic
partnership with the Israeli medical institution, Chaim Sheba Medical Centre
(CSMC), to ensure systematic and ongoing capacity development of neonatal
services. Immunization rates remained high throughout the country. Pregnant
women attending at least four antenatal care visits increased from 60 to 70 per cent.
All HIV-infected pregnant women received a complete course of antiretroviral
prophylaxis, which reduced the risk of mother-to-child transmission.
14. A new Alliance on Early Childhood Development (ECD), consisting of
Parliamentarians, academic experts and civil society actors, created with UNICEF
support, ensured endorsement of the National Strategic Plan of Act ion for Early
Childhood Development 2007-2009 and enabled the establishment of the first child
development centre in Georgia dedicated to promoting positive child-rearing and -caring
practices at family and community levels through an integrated early chil dhood
development approach.
15. The Government prioritizes child protection, and has adopted a Child Welfare
Action Plan 2008-2011, which outlines the key intervention areas for reforming the
childcare system. The Action Plan informs a new phase in the childcare reform
process — moving towards reaching vulnerable and at-risk children before family
breakdown occurs. A focused and sustained effort around deinstitutionalization has
produced a 52 per cent decline in the number of children living in institutiona l care.
Family reunification has been a priority, and formal foster care and guardianship
now function as alternatives to institutional care. The role of the European Union,
the World Bank and the United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), as well as key partners such as Save the Children, EveryChild, First Step
Georgia and World Vision, have been critical to the reform process.
16. Social work as a profession has developed significantly. Alongside government
partners, key partners in efforts to promote social work include the Georgian
Association of Social Workers and Tbilisi State University. In 2000, there were only
18 social workers; today, there are nearly 200 working in 53 social -work teams
throughout the country. Two universities now offer degree programmes in social
work, and paraprofessional training has also become available. A 2007 study found
that the 86 per cent of children referred to a social worker were able to continue
living with their families, 13 per cent were placed in family substitute care, and only
1 per cent were placed in residential care.

5

17. A comprehensive national strategy on juvenile justice was adopted in 2009
within the broader Criminal Justice Reform Strategy. Official policies that conflicted
with child protection in this area have been abandoned. Treatment of juvenile
offenders has improved, particularly in detention and correctional facilities. The
appointment and training of specialized judges and prosecutors have been
institutionalized. The reforms and increase in system capacity are due to the
combined efforts of the Government, Penal Reform International, the Georgian Bar
Association and other key actors, with support from the European Union and the
Government of the Netherlands. UNICEF has had a key rol e in convening partners
working in the sector, providing technical assistance and facilitating policy
dialogue.
18. A real-time evaluation in 2009 found that 73,000 children affected by the 2008
armed conflict were able to start the new school year in Octo ber 2008 through a
back-to-school programme coordinated by the Ministry of Education and Science
with UNICEF support. Government efforts to prevent epidemics and malnutrition
among 130,000 internally displaced persons were supported by UNICEF through its
cluster coordination role in water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and child
nutrition. Eighty-four affected communities established inter-agency child-friendly
spaces. In addition to United Nations organizations, key partners in the
humanitarian response and recovery phases included Save the Children,
International Rescue Committee, Norwegian Refugee Council, Action Contre la
Faim, World Vision and the United Methodist Committee on Relief.
Lessons learned
19. The ongoing national reform process and the European Union-Georgia
European Neighbourhood Policy have provided opportunities to advance the child
rights agenda through leveraging key partnerships with the European Union and
World Bank, as well as ensured that resources are pooled and branches of
international assistance are mutually reinforcing. Efforts will go towards
strengthening institutions through capacity development for human rights -based
budget monitoring and policy advocacy. This strengthening will better enable rights
holders to claim their rights. It is welcomed by the Public Defender’s Office,
Parliament and civil society groups.
20. Following a 2009 assessment, accelerated establishment of support services
for young people on probation has helped to reintegrate children with families and
communities. The Government is committed to establishing a system of juvenile
probation officers throughout the country, providing opportunities to build a broader
continuum of services for vulnerable youth.
21. The successful birth registration campaign led by the Civil Registration
Agency, supported by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and UNICEF, has demonstrated the importance of supporting service
provision with carefully targeted social mobilization, which can overcome cu ltural
and traditional obstacles. Underutilization of health and other services, rather than
their availability, is the greatest constraint to further improving the situation of
Georgian children, especially in marginalized groups. The midterm review of 20 09
identified the need for increased investments in social mobilization and
communication for development capacity in the country.

6

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Integrated and inclusive systems for children

1 200

20 200

21 400

Social policy, child rights monitoring and
communication

1 875

5 000

6 875

675

100

775

3 750

25 300

29 050

Programme

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
22. Programme preparation was undertaken in the first quarter of 2010 in
collaboration with key Government counterparts and under the leadership of the
Office of the Prime Minister. The process was informed by the 2009 Situation
Analysis of Children, a real-time evaluation of the response of UNICEF to the
humanitarian crisis in Georgia, the 2009 midterm review and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2011-2015. The joint strategy
meeting for the UNDAF was held in February 2010. The observations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women were considered, particularly those on child
protection, family environment, and alternative care and special protection
measures. Consultations were held with counterparts, civil society organizations,
donors and experts. Priorities identified by children in participatory action research
groups, schools, and communities also shaped the proposed programme.
Programme components results and strategies
23. The proposed programme of cooperation is supporting the commitment of
Georgia to achieve the Millennium Development Goals set for 2015. It is designed
to address social exclusion and system and capacity gaps as well as the underlying
issue of child poverty. The overarching goal of the country programme is to support
those elements of the Government’s ongoing reform process which strengthen social
inclusion and cohesion, with a view to reducing inequities among children and
increasing the potential for development of their human and social capital.
24. The country programme will comprise two mutually reinforcing components,
namely: Integrated and Inclusive Systems for Children and Social Policy, and Child
Rights Monitoring and Communication. Respectively, the programmes will
contribute to the achievement of the following results by the end of 2015: (a) more
children and mothers benefit from quality basic and alternative social services
(including integrated and decentralized services) that address targeted disparities;
and (b) key outstanding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(ref. CRC/G/GEO/CO/3) continue to be fulfilled and advanced.
25. The first programme component result will contribute significantl y to a
positive change in the situation of children and mothers, whereby (a) 80 per cent of
the poorest quintile are included in government social benefit programmes; (b) all

7

children receive a birth certificate; (c) 50 per cent of children from the poores t
quintile are enrolled in pre-school education, with an equal ratio of boys and girls;
(d) 80 per cent of newborns receive essential newborn care according to the WHO recommended guidelines; (e) 70 per cent of children-at-risk of institutionalization
instead receive alternative services; and (f) half of juvenile offenders are diverted to
non-punitive care and prevention services.
26. The second programme component will contribute to a more responsive state
infrastructure for monitoring the rights of childr en by (a) improving the reliability of
data collection systems to facilitate effective evaluation of and follow-up on the
situation of children; (b) enabling the consideration of the best interests of the child
in legislative and decision-making processes, including programmes, policies,
judicial and administrative proceedings; (c) increasing resources allocated for
combating child poverty, inequality and disparities; (d) increasing the meaningful
participation of civil society and the media in monitoring the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and increasing the participation of children; and
(e) strengthening the capacity of the National Child Rights Centre to fulfil its
mandate.
27. The proposed programme builds on the results achieved during the prior cycle
and is centred on areas of early childhood development, education and child
protection. It uses strategies for which UNICEF has recognized expertise and can
enhance the ongoing Government-led reform process. The programme will support
development of policies and innovative approaches to strengthen systems, improve
the provision of services and bring them in line with international standards and
norms. There will be a renewed focus on communication for development to trigger
positive changes in behaviour and attitudes and to overcome traditional and cultural
obstacles to fulfilling children’s rights. Existing partnerships will be strengthened
and new alliances developed in order to create programme synergies, leverage
additional resources for children and ensure that human rights and gender concerns
are effectively addressed. Support will be provided to connect implementing bodies
with international networks, good practices and sources of technical expertise, and
to convene partners, decision makers and other stakeholders across sectors. Support
in ensuring effective coordination mechanisms and contingency plans for emergency
preparedness and response will also be provided.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
28. The programme supports the priorities of the Government plans and reforms as
set out in Basic Data and Directions for 2008-20111, the Child Welfare Action Plan
2008-2011, and the European Union-Georgia European Neighbourhood Policy
Action Plan (ENP). The ENP covers eight priority areas, including poverty
reduction efforts and sustainable development. Significant steps identified to reduce
levels of poverty include the introduction of effective poverty measures to reduce
the number of people with income below poverty line and improve d social cohesion,
including sustainable systems for education, health and other social services with
access for all.
29. The country programme will be a key component of the broad United Nations
partnership described in the UNDAF, which has three priority areas: (a) reduced
poverty through support to sustainable economic growth and human development;
(b) democratic development through balanced, independent, fair and participatory

8

governance systems and processes promoted at all levels, based on rule of law,
human rights and equality principles; and (c) reduced disaster losses in lives and in
the social, economic and environmental assets of communities and the country
through a preventive and proactive approach to risk management.
Relationship to international priorities
30. The programme supports the Millennium Declaration and the Millennium
Development Goals targeted for 2015, which coincide with the end of this country
programme. The principles and goals of A World Fit for Children have also guided
the development of this document. It responds to other international commitments
of Georgia, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Declaration of
Commitment for the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on
HIV/AIDS and the Child Care System Reform initiative, led by UNICEF and
Government partners across the region. The programme also reflects the priorities of
the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan 2006-2013.
Programme components
31. Integrated and inclusive systems for children. The programme component
contributes to ensuring that by the end of 2015 more children and mothers benefit
from quality (including integrated and decentralized) basic and alt ernative social
services, addressing targeted disparities. The programme component will also
address wider social issues, such as child poverty, and their impact on access to and
quality of services through the participation of communities, endorsement of policy
frameworks and strengthening of systems in line with international standards. It
focuses on equitable access to education, ECD, maternal and child health, and social
and child protection services, particularly for vulnerable and excluded children an d
families. Recognizing that poverty is a main cause of exclusion, the programme will
generate strategic information and advice on policies to increase the reach and
effectiveness of government social benefit programmes, which currently exclude
70 per cent of the poorest quintile.
32. In the area of education, the programme will focus on the development of
policies and innovative approaches to enhance quality of, and access to, preschool
and primary school as well as the adoption of child -friendly schools at the primary
level. The programme will enhance national capacity to improve the relevance of
secondary education and informal learning to bring young people’s skills and
capacities in line with national development strategies, and strengthen labour marke t
opportunities. Technical assistance will be provided to ensure that national primary school curriculum and teaching methodologies reflect international child -friendly
school standards. A situation analysis will inform the Government’s development of
a comprehensive policy on youth. Within this framework, support will be given to
the development of services for adolescents in areas affected by armed conflict,
those preparing to leave institutional care and those in conflict with the law.
Partnership with the United Nations Development Programme will help develop
civic education (including on climate change), promotion of healthy lifestyles, and
support to the development of vocational training.
33. The programme will further enhance technical expertise to further decrease
newborn and infant mortality and morbidity by strengthening the quality and

9

organization of perinatal services, including newborn screening programmes, and
development and implementation of policies to increase access to services; reduce
out-of-pocket payments; and address cultural and traditional obstacles through
health promotion and education, and supporting mechanisms for monitoring
disparities. The programme will expand its collaboration with partners in nutrition
to effectively implement the recommendations of the 2009 National Nutrition
Survey. Government capacity on communication for development focusing on
childcare practices will be strengthened, with a focus on reaching those
communities that have high levels of child mortality and morbidity.
34. UNICEF will work with the Water Supply Regional Development Agency to
ensure a systematic approach towards improving the WASH infrastructure and
ensuring access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation and hygiene for the
most vulnerable. The programme will support the government in ensuring basic
standards in all new internally displaced person settlements and coordination among
partners.
35. Based upon the specific situation of vulnerable children in Georgia, the child
protection area will focus on strengthening social protection and child welfare
systems through policy development and improvement of decentralized services
protecting children and women from violence and exploitation, helping children
remain with their families, and promoting alternatives to institutionalization.
Children and their families will have access to services through the strengthening
national child protection systems, with functioning referral and response
mechanisms in place. The programme will continue to support the Government’s
ongoing efforts to build a system of juvenile justice established in line with
international standards, inclusive of prevention, diversion and restorative justice
elements. UNICEF will provide technical assistance to the Criminal Justice Reform
Inter-Agency Coordination Council; Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Corrections
and Legal Affairs; and Ministry of Labour, Health and Social Affairs to adopt laws
and implement the national juvenile justice strategy. This strategy identifie s the
roles of duty-bearers and ensures that incarceration and deprivation of liberty is only
used as a last resort.
36. The social policy, child-rights monitoring and communication programme
component contributes to ensuring that by 2015 Georgia advances the fulfilment of
the following key outstanding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child: improving data systems, aligning legislation with the best interests of the
child, increasing resource allocation for combating child poverty, and ac tively
involving civil society in Committee recommendations and reporting monitoring
and implementation. This second programme expands the scope of the cooperation
by supporting Government and its partners to monitor and evaluate development
activities, identify policy options related to social safety nets for children, and
improve capacities for budgetary analysis and increases in the social -sector budget
for children. Communication for development and advocacy will be geared towards
increased awareness of children’s issues. The programme is designed to have
strengthened national information and knowledge on the situation of children and
women and evidence-based policies, social-sector plans and budgets for children by
the end of 2015.
37. The programme will enhance national capacity in monitoring and evaluation to
inform evidence-based policymaking. Child rights monitoring through support to the

10

State Party reporting process and capacity development for national institutions,
including the Department of Statistics and the Public Defender’s Office, will be key
to ensuring quality and timely reporting on the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Gender will be mainstreamed in large part through the provision and use of
gender-disaggregated data.
38. In the area of social policy, this programme component will provide technical
assistance to social-sector reform and the formulation of policies, strategies and
budgets targeting vulnerable and socially excluded children, based on quantitative
and qualitative analysis of disaggregated data and policy reviews across all social
sectors. UNICEF will work with the Social Service Agency and other partners to
ensure that the social protection and welfare system is responsive to the needs of
families with children.
39. Strategic evidence-based advocacy and communication will be implemented
for social and behavioural change and leveraging resources. Partnerships with
Parliamentarians, civil society, religious leaders, the private sector and other
organizations will be expanded so that child rights remain a prime focus of public
attention. The capacities of mass media will be further strengthened to increase
professional reporting on children’s issues and to allow for children’s voices to be
heard.
40. The programme support component will cover recurrent costs, including
salaries, utility costs and security, to ensure compliance with the United Nations
Minimum Operating Security Standards.
Major partnerships
41. The Country Programme will work in cooperation with key counterpart
Ministries, including the Ministries of Labour, Health, and Social Affairs; Education
and Science; Justice; Corrections and Legal Assistance; and Regional Development
and Infrastructure of Georgia, as well as local authorities at the regional and
municipal levels. Other national partners include the Parliamentary Committees on
Human Rights and Civil Integration and on Health Care and Social Issues, the
Public Defender’s Office and the National Alliance on Early Child Development.
Key civil society partners are the Georgian Young Lawyers Association, Association
of Young Economists of Georgia, CLARITAS, Children of Georgia, Civic
Development Institute, and national professionals.
42. UNICEF is partnering with the European Union and the Government of
Netherlands to assist the Government in developing capacity across the juvenile
justice system to ensure international norms and standards. The Child Welfare
Reform process has benefited from close collaboration among USAID, the European
Community and the World Bank. They are also key partners in health -sector reform
and in UNICEF support to maternal and child health. The Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency has been partnering with UNICEF in the field of
WASH in conflict-affected areas as well as in child protection. Close collaboration
among United Nations agencies, funds and programmes remains essential in
addressing populations with humanitarian needs and ensuring access to areas where
humanitarian programming is required.

11

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
43. The UNDAF results matrix and its monitoring and evaluation plan will provide
the overall framework for monitoring and evaluating achievement of
UNDAF/UNICEF outcomes. Monitoring the status of children and families,
especially the socially excluded, is a key component of the country programme.
44. Child-rights impact assessments and research on child poverty and exclusion
will be supported. In conjunction with the midterm review, planned for 2013, the
integrated monitoring and evaluation plan will include midyear and annual reviews
with partners, informed by field visits, evaluations and surveys.
45. The Office of the Prime Minister
Country programme components will
Ministries as well as the regional
collaboration will be carried out with the

12

will review and monitor the programme.
be implemented by the respective line
governments. Close coordination and
wider United Nations Country Team.

