Ghana
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Ghana
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.25) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

10.7

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

69

Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2008)

14

(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

11/16, 19/9
350 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment (net, %, male/female, 2008)

76/77 b
81 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2008)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

82

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

13

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

1.8

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)

34

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2008)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

71
72/70, 82/65, 60/88

GNI per capita (US$)

700

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

94

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

93

†

a

b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
350 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassif ication of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
DHS 2008 data: Primary school attendance data (net, %) for urban/rural = 80/70,
poorest/richest = 59/86.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Ghana is recognized as a model of political stability, good governance and
democratic openness. Ghanaians enjoy political rights, civil liberties, a free press
and an effective judicial system. With annual economic growth at 6 per cent and a
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of $1,318, 1 Ghana falls within the middleincome country category. Beginning in 2011, oil production in the Western Region
is projected to generate additional resources of up to 7 per cent of GDP annually.
However, these developments pose challenges to the Government, with heightened
expectations of Ghanaians and the international community that living conditions
will improve rapidly, and the likelihood of large-scale migration to the Western
Region. Moreover, Ghana’s recent assumption of middle-income country status and
the discovery of oil could lead to declines in official development assistance (ODA)
in the future.

__________________
1

2

The GDP was rebased by the Government in late 2010, increasing from $753 per capita to
$1,318 per capita.

2.
Ghana is on track to achieve many of the Millennium Development Goals.
Poverty was nearly halved in 15 years, from 51.7 per cent in 1991-1992 to 28.5 per
cent in 2005-2006. However, these averages mask disparities by location and among
population groups (by gender, wealth quintile, level of education). Some 18.2 per
cent of Ghanaians are extremely poor; an estimated 3.4 million children live in
poverty, with 2.2 million living in extreme poverty. The northern regions are the
poorest in the country, where between 52 per cent and 88 per cent of the population
live in poverty. The proportion of people living below the national poverty line in
Accra nearly tripled, from 4 per cent in 1999 to 11 per cent in 2005 -2006.
3.
The under-five mortality rate declined significantly between 2003 and 2009,
from 111 per 1,000 live births to 69 per 1,000 live births, particularly in the two
wealthiest quintiles. Over 40 per cent of the under-five mortality rate is a result of
neonatal mortality. Only 30 per cent of households in Ghana own a long -lasting
insecticide-treated bed net and only 28 per cent of children sleep under one.
Malnutrition — primarily from seasonal food scarcity and poor child feeding
practices — contributes to an estimated 40 per cent of childhood deaths and
morbidity. The National Health Insurance Scheme, launched in 2005, has yet to
reach 32 per cent of the population, mostly in the rural areas and the bottom
quintiles. Good progress has been made in reducing preventable diseases, with a
reported 90 per cent immunization coverage against measles.
4.
The maternal mortality ratio (350 per 100,000 live births) remains high; it is
unlikely that the country will reach the target for Millennium Development Goal 5
by 2015. Although 78 per cent of pregnant women attend the recommended four
antenatal visits, only 59 per cent have access to skilled birth attendants. Disparities
persist in access to skilled birth attendants by wealth status, educational levels, and
by location. 2
5.
HIV prevalence is reported at 1.9 per cent within the general population and
2.9 per cent among pregnant women, with rates varying from 2 per cent in the
Northern Region to 4.9 per cent in the Eastern Region. The estimated percentage of
HIV-positive pregnant women who received anti-retroviral drugs (ARVs) for the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV increased tenfold,
from 2.5 per cent in 2005 to 27 per cent in 2009. However, only 12 per cent of
babies born to HIV-positive women received ARVs in 2009. Ghana has already
achieved the Millennium Development Goal 7 target for access to improved water
sources (82 per cent national, 93 per cent urban and 77 per cent rural). However,
access to improved sanitation is only 13 per cent (35 per cent urban, 7 per cent
rural).
6.
Compulsory and free basic education, since 2005, has contributed to an
increase in the national net enrolment rate, from 69 per cent in 2005/2006 to 84 per
cent in 2009/2010. However, an estimated 650,000 children remain out of school.
National gender parity in primary education has been achieved, but regional
disparities in enrolment, attendance and transition persist. The poor quality of
education is a major concern; only 14 per cent of grade -6 students achieved
proficiency in mathematics in 2009.

__________________
2

Skilled birth attendant ratio by population groups: richest/poorest: 95 per cent/24 per cent;
secondary/no education: 92 per cent/36 per cent; and urban/rura l: 84 per cent/43 per cent.

3

7.
Ghana was the first country to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. However, birth registration is only at 71 per cent, and an estimated
1.3 million children are engaged in child labour activities. Orphans and vulnerable
children (OVCs), including children living with disabilities, do not have equal
access to basic social services. In 2009, approximately 10,000 cases of violence
against children were reported to the police; the large majority of the victims (85 per
cent) were girls. Negative socio-cultural attitudes towards children and women
persist. Harmful traditional practices, such as fe male genital mutilation, child
marriage and the misuse of fostering arrangements, continue, mostly in the northern
parts of the country. Although tension in the Northern Region has declined, annual
floods increase the vulnerability of children and women.
8.
Underlying causes of inequities include the long-standing neglect of
development interventions in the northern regions. Furthermore, Ghana has not
significantly used the evidence from evaluations to prioritize fund allocation to
interventions proven to improve the rights of the child. District and community
levels, where most of the problems must be tackled, are insufficiently resourced.
These were among the observations flagged by the Committee of the Rights of the
Child in 2006. Government initiatives to address inequities include the
Decentralization Policy, the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty project,
National Health Insurance Scheme and the Savannah Accelerated Development
Authority agenda, with varying levels of successes.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2011
Key results achieved
9.
UNICEF, with funding from the Governments of Canada and Japan, supported
the roll-out of the Accelerated Child Survival and Development strategy in the three
northern regions and the Central Region, contributing to a reduction in the national
under-five mortality rate. There have been no confirmed measles death and no
indigenous cases of wild poliovirus in Ghana since 2003. Underweight prevalence
decreased from 18 per cent in 2003 to 14 per cent in 2008; exclusive breastfeeding
rates increased from 53 per cent in 2003 to 63 per cent in 2008. UNICEF, in
partnership with Irish Aid, the World Health Organization and the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, supported the roll-out of PMTCT services in
disadvantaged regions, contributing to an increase in the proportion of HIV-positive
pregnant women who received ARVs, from 8 per cent in 2006 to 27 per cent in
2009. Technical assistance provided by UNICEF and partners contribut ed to the
country’s success in leveraging resources for malaria control from the Global Fund
to Fight for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the Department for International
Development (DFID) of the United Kingdom and other sources. UNICEF
contributed to a nationwide emergency obstetric and newborn care needs assessment
to inform the scale-up of interventions to improve maternal and neonatal health. A
national salt iodization strategy was developed and is being implemented.
Communication for development is now a Ghana Health Service priority, and
UNICEF supported the development of a national communication for development
strategy.

4

10. Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) has expanded to over 400
communities. An evaluation informed the development of a rural sanitation model
for scaling-up sanitation improvement. Some 175,000 people in dracunculiasis endemic areas had access to improved water sources, slashing the number of cases
from 501 in 2008 to 8 in 2010. These impressive results were achieved through a
strategic partnership of the Government of Ghana and UNICEF with the European
Union, the World Health Organization and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Other examples of joint efforts are the development of the Health Sector Medium Term Development Plan 2010-2013 and the Ghana Compact on Sanitation and
Water for All, launched in 2010, with a substantial government commitment of more
than $350 million annually for improved water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
services.
11. Enrolment continues to improve, though quality of education is still a problem.
Gross enrolment in 76 disadvantaged districts supported by UNICEF increased from
83 per cent in 2004-2005 to 88 per cent in 2009-2010, while net enrolment for
children aged 4-5 years increased significantly, from 39 per cent to 64 per cent, with
funding from the Government of Netherlands. Intensive enrolment campaigns,
capacity development, and community mobilization supported by UNICEF were
instrumental in increasing gender parity. 3 UNICEF provided technical leadership in
the development of the new Education Strategic Plan 2010 -2020 and supported
(with funds from Irish Aid, the Government of the United Kingdom and the Global
Fund) the implementation of the HIV Alert School model. The HIV Alert School
model has now been expanded nationwide; a recent knowledge, attitudes, practices
and behaviour survey showed that 76.4 per cent of children in junior secondary
schools now have information and skills to reduce their risks and vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS. 4
12. Policies and interventions to protect vulnerable children from abuse and
exploitation have been reinforced. With UNICEF support, a National Social
Protection Strategy (2008-2012) was finalized, as well as national plans addressing
the sexual exploitation of children, the worst forms of child labour and orphans and
vulnerable children. UNICEF, with funding from the United States Agency for
International Development and Irish Aid, is implementing the national plan of action
on OVCs. The capacity of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, Ghana Immigration
Service and the Human Trafficking Board were strengthened, resulting in a
reduction in cross-border and domestic trafficking of children and an increase in the
number of arrests, prosecutions and convictions of child traffickers. A joint
programme with the International Labour Organization, the International
Organization on Migration and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
contributed to an increase in birth registration, from 54 per cent in 2006 to 71 per
cent in 2009, but it is still far off the target of 90 per cent.
13. The programme strengthened national capacities to generate, analyse and use
critical knowledge on the situation of children. GhanaInfo was operationalized and
key studies were undertaken and widely disseminated, including the multiple
indicator cluster survey (MICS), a child poverty study, a study on social protection 5
__________________
3

4
5

The gender parity index in the 76 districts increased between 2004/2005 and 2009/2010 from
0.94 to 0.96, meeting the government target.
UNICEF knowledge, attitudes, practices and behaviour survey, 2010.
A regional study by the Overseas Development Institute of the United Kingdom.

5

and a participatory poverty and vulnerability assessment. The Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning has introduced programme-based budgeting in two
ministries. With the support from UNICEF, DFID and the World Bank, four
ministries (for education, health, agriculture, and employment and social welfare)
are creating a common targeting mechanism to improve the efficiency of social
protection assistance. UNICEF, with support from the United States Agency for
International Development, has also started to assist the Government in
strengthening the monitoring and evaluation of social protection.
14. UNICEF contributed to peace education, nutrition and child protection within
the joint United Nations Human Security Project in the three northern regions and to
flood emergency response (in the three northern regions in 2007, 2009 and 2010 and
Central Region in 2010), which enhanced the resilience of children and women.
Lessons learned
15. The midterm review revealed that, while focussing on the poorest regions of
the country, greater emphasis on the causes of inequity is required. UNICEF needs
to support the Government in using data and analysis to delve deeper into the
dynamics of disparities and to identify ways to scale up high -impact pro-poor
interventions. In addition, greater emphasis on socio -cultural norms is needed to
change behaviours that contribute to inequity.
16. UNICEF-supported community-based interventions, including community case
management and CLTS, are most effectively scaled up when implemented within the
context of systems strengthening, with strong government -led coordination. The
integrated approach to dracunculiasis eradication is an excellent example of how
government leadership, with the help of development partners and NGOs, created an
effective convergence at the community level, resulting in a drastic reduction in the
number of cases. This lesson will be utilized to address other critical issues, such as
maternal mortality reduction and improved education quality.
17. Support to districts for planning and budgeting for children is unlikely to yield
results without more effective implementation of the national Decentralization
Policy. UNICEF should therefore work with partners to help ensure that the
Decentralization Policy is effectively implemented at the national level and to
strengthen capacity at district and community levels to improve integrated delive ry.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)

(In thousands of United States dollars)

6

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health and nutrition

9 500

63 500

73 000

Water, sanitation and hygiene

6 000

30 000

36 000

Education

6 000

16 500

22 500

Child protection

6 000

12 500

18 500

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Advocacy, communication, monitoring and
analysis

6 725

5 000

11 725

Cross-sectoral and support

8 830

12 500

21 330

43 055

140 000

183 055

Total

Preparation process
18. The preparation of the country analysis and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) was led by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning and involved relevant government ministries, the United Nations system,
development partners, civil society, universities and research institutions. UNICEF
co-chaired the UNDAF Core Group. The strategic focus of the UNDAF 2012 -2016
is aligned to the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda (GSGDA)
2010-2013. Informed by the situation analysis of children and women (2010) and
the 2008 midterm review of the current country programme, the new country
programme has been developed jointly by the Government and UNICEF. The
UNDAF results matrices were reviewed and the draft country programme
documents of UNICEF, UNFPA, the United Nations Development Programme, and
the World Food Programme were peer-reviewed during agency-specific strategy
meetings organized between December 2010 and January 2011.
Programme and component results and strategies
19. The country programme aims to support the Government of Ghana in realizing
the survival, development and protection of children in an equitable and sustained
manner. It also seeks to help create a rights-based environment enabling children to
participate in decision-making on issues affecting their lives. All proposed
programme interventions will target the four most deprived regions (the three
northern regions and Central region) while a number of interventions will target
additional regions, based on specific inequities that have been identified for these
regions. More specifically, water and sanitation interventions will target the Volta
region; child protection interventions will target the Western region and grea ter
Accra; and health, nutrition and education interventions will target the Eastern
region.
20. The health and nutrition component will focus on the following results, with a
special focus on the five most deprived regions: (a) women and children have
equitable access to and improved use of quality, high-impact maternal, neonatal and
child health interventions, including PMTCT; (b) maternal and child undernutrition
is reduced.
21. The water, sanitation and hygiene component has two key results: (a) over ha lf
of the population have sustainable and equitable access to and use of basic
sanitation services, underpinned by improved hygiene practices and sustainable
water services; (b) sector policies, strategies, knowledge -base, systems and human
resources capacity at national level and in the five most deprived regions are
improved, enabling decentralized, scaled-up, sustainable and pro-poor WASH
interventions.

7

22. The results of the education component are: (a) the needs of out -of-school
children aged 4-14 years, especially girls, children with special needs and OVCs are
systematically assessed and addressed in disadvantaged areas in five focus regions;
(b) educational quality and outcomes of pre-primary and primary schools improved
in five focus regions.
23. The results of the child protection component are: (a) a functioning national
child protection system that will better protect children, especially OVCs, from
violence, exploitation, abuse and discrimination in the five most deprived regions
and during emergencies; (b) capacity of the justice system strengthened to deliver
justice services for children.
24. The results of the advocacy, communication, monitoring and analysis
component are: (a) advocacy and communication strategies, planning and budgeting
procedures are based on evidence, linked to functional systems for results -based
management and monitoring and evaluation, and are used to advance children ’s
rights and encourage equitable development; (b) vulnerable and marginalized
groups across Ghana are empowered to access and utilize improved social services
and adopt key family practices.
25. In order to achieve results, UNICEF will employ a mix of strategies. This
includes institutional capacity development for policy implementation, pro -poor
budgeting at national level as well as capacity for planning, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation at regional and district levels. Addressing equity,
particularly in relation to gender, location and disadvantaged groups, will continue
to be of top priority. Strategic partnerships will be developed with United Nations
agencies, development partners and NGOs around Millennium Development Goals
where progress is slow, especially maternal mortality reduction and access to
improved sanitation. Public-private partnerships will be strengthened.
26. Community-based strategies will be strengthened with government-led
coordination at regional and district levels. Leadership capacities of the four most
deprived regions will be strengthened to better understand and address inequities.
Using key child indicators, the regional governments and UNICEF will identify
disadvantaged districts where an effective convergence of activities of different
sectors can achieve results for the most vulnerable children and women, using
community-based approaches, such as CLTS, the child-friendly schools (CFS)
model, community case management, child-friendly justice and child welfare
services. Lessons learned at community, district and regional levels, especially in
maternal and neonatal health, will be applied in scaling up interventions. UNICEF
knowledge management functions will be strengthened to support these processes at
all levels, in collaboration with United Nations agencies and partners.
27. Risks to the achievement of expected results, such as flooding, social unrest
and conflicts in parts of the country and neighbouring countries, and predictability
of funding will be assessed annually and inform the adjustment of strategies and
optimal utilization of opportunities. Programming on di saster risk reduction and
peace building will be strengthened by enhancing local, national and UNICEF
capacity for prevention, mitigation, effective response and recovery.

8

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
28. The country programme of cooperation is aligned with the GSGDA
2011-2013, the Education Strategic Plan, the Health Sector Medium-Term
Development Plan (2010-2013), the Ghana Compact on Sanitation and Water, the
National Social Protection Strategy and the National Plan of Action on OVCs. It
will contribute to the realization of all four thematic UNDAF areas and 9 of the 12
UNDAF outcomes, most substantially those on sanitation and water; maternal and
child health; social and child protection systems; education and advocacy,
governance and monitoring and evaluation.
Relationship to international priorities
29. Programme design, strategies and planned results have been guided by the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, A World Fit for Children, the Millennium
Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals, the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action and the Hyogo Framework for Action.
The programme contributes to the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) and
the Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS campaign. Specific results contributing
to MTSP focus area 3 (Children and AIDS) will be integrated as intermediate
results. Climate change will also be integrated into relevant programme
components.
Programme components
30. There are six programme components, based on the gaps identified in the
situation analysis of children and women, the country assessment and the UNDAF
and drawing on the comparative advantage of UNICEF. Four of these are sectoral:
health and nutrition, water sanitation and hygiene, education, and child protection.
Two components are cross-cutting: advocacy, communication, monitoring and
analysis, as well as cross-sectoral support. While oil revenue will offset some of the
potential loss in ODA and general budget support, the significant funding gaps for
the Millennium Development Goals mean that such revenue will need to be
allocated to both infrastructure creation and social services. All of the proposed
programme components will therefore support national policy analysis, strategy
development and capacity-building of key government institutions to ensure that
government allocations and interventions maintain a clearer focus on human
development, aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals in an
equitable and sustained manner. Furthermore, UNICEF will need to strengthen
advocacy to donors for continued ODA, as major gaps still exist in the s urvival and
development of children.
31. Health and nutrition. This component aims to support Ghana’s efforts to
address the high burden of maternal, neonatal and child morbidity and mortality,
realizing the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, improving the
treatment of paediatric AIDS and strengthening the linkages between child health
and PMTCT. The Ministry of Health will be supported to develop and operationalize
equity-focused and gender-sensitive health-sector plans and strategies. The
introduction of new vaccines for the prevention of pneumonia and diarrhoea will be
supported and the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses package at facility

9

and community levels will be expanded to include additional evidence -based and
simple interventions for preventing neonatal deaths, such as the Kangaroo method
(for addressing premature births), which is widely operational in the Central Region.
Specific and urgent attention will be provided to scale up PMTCT interventions,
including early diagnosis, treatment and care for HIV-exposed and HIV-infected
children. There will be a focus on reducing underweight, stunting among children
and maternal and child anaemia. Nutritional deficiencies among children will be
addressed through micronutrient supplementation and food fortification. Increasing
the availability and consumption of iodized salt in households is a priority.
Harmonized and strengthened multidisciplinary nutrition-sector response will be
facilitated through institutional capacity building of the Ghana Health Service to
coordinate and align nutrition stakeholders through the Nutrition Partners Forum, a
working group under the health-sector coordination mechanism.
32. Water, hygiene and sanitation. This component will focus on increasing
access to improved sanitation and water services to disadvantaged communities.
Water and sanitation services in schools and health centres in 5 deprived regions
will be improved and access to improved water and sanitation services will be
provided to underserved and formerly dracunculiasis-endemic communities. Service
delivery in WASH will be gender-sensitive, using strategies such as CLTS,
sanitation marketing and community-based integrated water resources management.
Hygiene behaviour change will be integrated with the delivery of sanitation and
water services, working closely with the health sector.
33. Education. This component will focus on increasing access to basic education
for disadvantaged and marginalized children in five regions and parts of Accra . Key
interventions include the expansion of quality kindergarten education,
implementation of innovative, targeted programmes, such as complementary
education for out-of-school children and inclusive education for children with
disabilities. The national CFS standards will be operationalized and new CFS
created in disadvantaged areas of five focus regions and parts of Accra, to ensure a
strong focus on child-centred pedagogy, to promote continuous, systematic
monitoring of child’s learning and development and to enhance child participation.
CFS will also ensure the promotion of a safe and healthy environment and
responsible behaviour among young people, including in hygiene and HIV/AIDS
prevention.
34. Child protection. This component will focus on establishing coordinating
mechanisms, monitoring and referral structures and the linking of formal and
informal social welfare and justice systems, to create an effective and holistic child
protection system and response. UNICEF will support capacity strengthening for
child and gender-sensitive social welfare services to facilitate the development of
prevention and early intervention services for vulnerable children. As part of justice sector reform, UNICEF will strengthen focus on children in conflict with the law,
child victims and witnesses of rights violations and support the legislative review
and improvement of child justice services in both formal and informal settings. The
implementation of initiatives for children in conflict with the law, including
counselling, probation and educational and vocational training, will be strengthened.
The programme will provide measures to address the gaps and challenges faced by
adolescents.

10

35. Advocacy, communication, monitoring and analysis. The component will
focus on gathering and disseminating appropriately disaggregated data and analysis
to demonstrate the impact of services on the most disadvantaged children. UNICEF
will assist the Government to undertake surveys, manage data in GhanaInfo, and
ensure a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework and equity, aligned
with the GSGDA, across all ministries, incorporating gender and child -rights
perspectives. The implementation of the Decentralization Policy will be supported
and monitored to determine how district and community-level services are reaching
children. UNICEF will assist ministries to analyse expenditures and prepare
programme-based budgets that prioritize the most cost-effective services for
children. To help the Ministry of Health to better address equity issues, a national
expenditure analysis for health interventions at the subnational level and a policy
analysis of the impacts of the National Health Insurance Scheme and the abolition
of user fees for pregnant women and for children under the age of 5 will be
conducted. Lessons from these activities will be utilized through the media and civil
society to advocate children’s rights. In addition, UNICEF will support the
Government to refine and implement strategies to provide social protection services
for the most disadvantaged women and children. Data will underpin UNICEF
support for behaviour change communication.
36. Prevention of HIV amongst adolescent girls and boys will receive special
attention in the interventions focusing on access to and qualit y of education and
health services for vulnerable and excluded children. UNICEF will work closely
with UNFPA to address primary prevention of HIV/AIDS among out -of-school
children and most-at-risk populations. 6 Emergency preparedness and response and
communication for development are integrated into the health, education, water and
sanitation and child protection programme areas.
37. Cross-sectoral costs will be used mainly for internal and external
coordination, communication planning and implementation, notably operating
expenses related to supply and logistics. Communications will also facilitate youth
participation efforts, based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Major partnerships
38. The United Nations system in Ghana has opted for the preparation of an
UNDAF action plan for the 2012-2016 programme. This will enhance the
opportunities for joint programming. As co-lead in WASH and education and as an
active member of other sector groups, UNICEF will continue to support improved
alignment among United Nations agencies and through its participation in sectorwide approaches to accelerate results for children and women.
39. UNICEF will continue to collaborate with global initiatives and partners,
including the Global Fund, the International Health Partnership, the GAVI Alliance,
Roll Back Malaria and Sanitation and Water for All. Cooperation will continue with
DFID and the World Bank on social protection and with the Government of Canada
on nutrition and water and sanitation. UNICEF will continue to cooperate with local
NGOs and faith-based organizations, which provide substantial support to
vulnerable people at the community level. Strategic partnerships will be pursued
__________________
6

In Ghana, UNFPA is the lead agency on this.

11

with universities, research institutions, such as the Institute for Socia l Science and
Economic Research, and NGOs, such as Participatory Development Associates.
40. Within the framework of the GSGDA, UNICEF will continue to participate in
harmonization and alignment initiatives, including sector-wide approaches. Current
engagement in the multi-donor budget support framework will be increased and
public-private partnerships will be strengthened, as these partnerships provide
opportunities for leveraging resources.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
41. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning is the national coordinating
body for the programme of cooperation. A five-year UNDAF action plan, annual
action plans and review processes will be developed together with relevant line
ministries. This will include midterm and annual reviews.
42. UNICEF will continue to work closely with the Ghana Statistical Service and
other key ministries in the implementation of the National Statistical Development
Strategy (NSDS), which has laid a solid foundation for generating t imely and
quality official statistics. The Government’s monitoring and evaluation plan,
together with the NSDS, will serve as the basis for the monitoring and evaluation of
the national development agenda and the country programme. A long -term survey
calendar has been developed to monitor progress towards the country’s achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals and the targets of the GSGDA. This includes
the fourth round of the MICS, the Demographic Health Survey, the Ghana Living
Standards Survey and the Child Labour Survey. These key surveys, together with
other studies and evaluations, will be incorporated into the five -year integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan. Additionally, UNICEF will take the lead in
strengthening the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation framework and its
operationalization, based on GhanaInfo. Continuous monitoring of the programme
through field visits and other internal standard UNICEF processes will be ensured.
A midterm review will be held at the end of 2014.

12

