Guatemala
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Guatemala
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.29) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 second regular session (14-16
September 2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 12 January 2010.

†

Basic data
(2007 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2002)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2006)

6.6
39
23 a
130 b
96/92

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

63

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

96

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

84

Adult HIV prevalence rate, %

0.8

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2000)
GNI per capita (US$)

29
2,440

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

82

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

93

†
a
b

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
Refers to 3-59 months.
Estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank in 2005, which is
adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths.

The situation of children and women
1.
Thirteen years ago, Guatemala signed peace accords in the hopes of putting an
end to more than three decades of internal armed conflict and strengthe ning its
democracy. Since then, four democratic governments have been elected, but
implementation of the social agenda enshrined in those accords is still pending. This
is especially the case with regard to the rights of indigenous people, who suffered
most of the consequences of the violence. The fragility of the State limits its ability
to guarantee people’s social and economic rights. Discrimination and exclusion
based on gender, social status and ethnic origin produce considerable difficulties for
the exercise of human rights, especially those of women and the indigenous
population. The reality is the worst in rural areas where, for example, only 2 of
every 10 girls attend primary school, and almost 70 per cent of women are illiterate.
They face the same inequalities in subsequent educational levels, work opportunities
and health.
2.
The territory of Guatemala covers 108,000 km², divided into 22 departments
and 333 municipalities. It is characterized by ethnic, cultural and linguistic
diversity. The country has 13.4 million inhabitants, of whom 49.3 per cent are under
age 18. Some 41 per cent of the population identifies itself as indigenous,
distributed among three major population groups: the Maya, the Xinka and the
Garífuna. An estimated 54 per cent of the population lives in rural areas and
46 per cent in urban areas. At the current annual growth rate (2.6 per cent), the
Guatemalan population is expected to double in 28 years.

2

3.
Between 2004 and 2007, the country enjoyed macroeconomic stability, but
growth rates of more than 4 per cent had limited impact on the well -being of most of
the population. Exclusion and disparities increased, with 46.8 per cent of the total
income concentrated in the hands of the wealthiest 10 per cent, whereas the poorest
20 per cent hold just 2.4 per cent of income. Although Guatemala is the largest
economy in Central America, 51 per cent of the population lives in poverty and
15 per cent in extreme poverty (both figures based on income). Among the
indigenous population that lives in rural areas, the percentage rises to 71.9.
Indigenous peoples have fewer opportunities, greater health risks and limited access
to public services. The main source of foreign exchange income is remittances sent
by emigrants to more than 980,000 households. In 2008, these represented close to
11 per cent of the gross national product.
4.
The main nutritional problem in Guatemala is chronic malnutrition (height for
age), which affects 49.3 per cent of children under 5 years old. A fifth of them
(21.1 per cent) suffer from severe chronic malnutrition. Gaps are large between
urban and rural areas. Chronic malnutrition affects 80 per cent of the indigenous
population because of extreme poverty and inappropriate child nutrition practices.
Only 50.6 per cent of children under 6 months of age are exclusively breastfed, and
only two-thirds of children aged 6 to 8 months receive complementary food. An
estimated 39.7 per cent of all children aged 6 to 59 months suffer from anaemia, as
well as 20 per cent of reproductive-age women. The country’s institutions have been
strengthened to manage anaemia in recent years, with the approval of the Law on
Food and Nutritional Security and creation of a responsible secretariat. Despite
these efforts, insufficient budgets drastically limit the State’s response.
5.
Many Guatemalans do not have access to safe drinking water, and a significant
part of the mostly rural population lacks improved sanitation facilities. The largest
deficiency in access to safe drinking water is in rural areas of departments such as
Escuintla (69.1 per cent) and Alta Verapaz (63.5 per cent). 1 In rural areas, coverage
of improved sanitation services is much lower than in urban areas.
6.
Guatemala has the third highest rate of child mortality in the Western
Hemisphere (39 deaths per 1,000 live births) and is sixth in maternal mortality
(130 deaths per 100,000 live births). 2 The country has only 9.7 doctors and
3.6 nurses for every 10,000 inhabitants. Of total deliveries receiving assistance,
31.4 per cent are assisted by trained staff; of these, only 7.1 per cent meet the
required quality standards and conditions. 3 These national averages hide an even
more critical situation in the interior of the country and particularly among the
indigenous population, where the maternal mortality ratio is 211 per 100,000 live
births and the neonatal mortality ratio is 30 per 1,000 live births. Immunization
coverage increased from 18 per cent in 1989 to 70 per cent in 2008. 4 Budget
allocated to the Ministry of Health has remained static, below 1 per cent of the gross
domestic product since 1998, representing around 16 per cent of social spending.
Resources for primary care are limited at health centres and posts.
__________________
1

2
3
4

“Second progress report on the Millennium Development Goals in Guatemala ”, SEGEPLAN,
2006, page 208.
International Bank for Industrial Development.
G. Estrada, “The health system in Guatemala”, 2008, page 88.
National Immunization Programme, 2007.

3

7.
The primary school enrolment rate reached 96 per cent in 2007. Less
significant progress was achieved at other levels, with pre -school coverage of
48 per cent and secondary school coverage of 36 per cent. Overall statistics show
few gender differences in primary and pre-school education coverage rates, statistics
disaggregated by gender and ethnic group show that indigenous girls finish primary
school at lower rates than boys. Dropout rates are high, revealing the inefficiency of
the school system. Retention is a central problem, since only 4 of every 10 c hildren
who enter primary school finish it. Girls, indigenous groups and rural households do
not have the same access to education as do boys, the non-indigenous and urban
households. Indigenous girls attend school for an average of three years. The
coverage of bilingual intercultural education in primary school has increased slowly:
of 7,832 schools with indigenous students, only 1,869, or 22 per cent, have a
certified bilingual teacher. Low social demand, the lack of trained teachers and
insufficient promotion, linked to low budgets, account for this inadequate coverage.
8.
Mother-to-child transmission is the predominant route for HIV infection in
young children. 5 Preliminary data based on seroprevalence show that, in 2007,
30,000 women aged 15 to 49 were infected. An estimated 3,900 children were born
infected with HIV between 2007 and 2009. 6 Only 111 women received services
aimed at preventing mother-to-child transmission in 2007, representing a tiny
proportion of total cases. The availability of shortened treatment at low cost has
provided the possibility of preventing these infections. With specific interventions,
the transmission rate could be reduced to less than 1 per cent. Identification and
registration of HIV-positive children presents difficulties that must be overcome to
ensure they receive treatment.
9.
State institutions have been seriously weakened by the increase in organized
crime and drug trafficking. The weakness of security forces, an inefficient justice
system and insecurity threaten the rule of law and democratic structures in the
country. Undeniable strides in legislative reform are threatened by the deficient
operation of justice, evidenced by the high levels of impunity. 7 Most seriously
affected by the limited access to justice are children, especially the indigenous, and
women. An average of 46 girls and boys are killed each month. Most of them are
adolescents, and the main cause of death is firearms. Homicidal violence increased
by 137 per cent between 1999 and 2008, from 2,655 to 6,692 homicides a year. The
country faced the most violent year in its history in 2008. Guatemala has one of the
highest rates of female murders in the world (603 deaths in 200 6, 591 in 2007 and
722 in 2008). 8 According to the Guatemala report of the International Commission
against Impunity, of 10,865 complaints received in 2008, 89.3 per cent were not
solved and 10.7 per cent resulted in a court decision. Out of this last figure, only
9.6 per cent resulted in a conviction, meaning that 2 per cent of the tot al complaints
were followed by an actual conviction; the impunity rate was 98 per cent. An
__________________
5

6

7

8

4

J. Martinez, “Feeding the infants of HIV-infected mothers”, Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, March 2004, 82(3).
Proposal for the extension of prevention of vertical transmission” UNICEF, September 2007,
p. 4.
According to the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (Comisión
Internacional contra la Impunidad en Guatemala), out of 100 cases of homicides, 2 are resolved
by the legal system.
Report of the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, 2008.

international index on the perception of corruption in various countries ranks
Guatemala 96th among 180 countries.
10. For many years, international adoptions were not managed properly in
Guatemala. Between 1997 and 2007, more than 30,000 children were given up for
international adoption by a system that offered no assurances regarding the child’s
origin or the suitability of the adopting family. This situation change d drastically in
2007, when the Congress of the Republic ratified the Convention on Protection of
Children and Co-Operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (The Hague
Convention) and the Adoption Law, which is harmonized with the Convention. The
Adoption Law and The Hague Convention are now being implemented, and
substantial progress has been made. This marks a drastic qualitative improvement
over the previous situation. The law stipulates investigation of the child’s origin and
the suitability of the adoptive family. In addition, national adoption has become a
viable option. The challenge lies in implementing the law using ethical and
transparent criteria in adoption procedures and in accrediting international adoption
agencies.
11. With the entry into force of the Law against Sexual Violence, Exploitation and
Trafficking in Persons, Guatemala became the last country in Central America to
adapt its criminal legislation to expand the scope of child protection.
12. The available statistics on family violence and child abuse give a limited idea
of the current situation, because adequate mechanisms have not been put in place to
gather this information and because silence and fear prevail. Only 8,231 cases of
domestic violence were reported in the capital city in 2004. On the other hand, the
most recent mother and child national survey shows that 32 per cent of women aged
15 to 49 believe that physical punishment is necessary for the education of girls and
boys.
13. Cultural patterns, poverty and exclusion explain the large proportion of girls
and boys who work, especially in rural areas where the indigenous population lives
and the protection situation is most critical. According to the latest national
employment survey, a quarter of all children and adolescents aged 7 to 16 were part
of the labour force, many of them performing very demanding tasks, frequently
without compensation. Family agricultural work is an important obstacle to school
attendance for girls and boys, in addition to the inability of educa tional institutions
to serve children who do not speak Spanish. The current economic situation has
forced a growing number of families to remove their children from school and place
them in a marginal, precarious and dangerous labour market.
14. Guatemala is also subject to environmental risks. In 2005 it was hit by tropical
storm Stan, in 1998 it suffered the devastating effects of hurricane Mitch and in
1991 it was affected by serious drought. The latest disasters have contributed to the
economic and social deterioration of the country, with direct consequences for the
poor population, particularly the indigenous. In recent years, climate change has
magnified the losses from small-scale disasters, making them more significant than
larger and more sporadic events. Guatemala is also located in a seismic risk area.

5

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved
15. UNICEF contributed to four key achievements: (a) Strengthening national and
institutional awareness of the challenge of chronic malnutrition for the country and
its particularly devastating effect on indigenous children. This included
development of the national programme for reduction of chronic malnutrition,
which is contributing to achievement of Millennium Development Goal 1 (reduce
malnutrition by 50 per cent by 2015). These actions were carried out in coordination
with the Food and Nutrition Security Secretariat and various private, public and
international organizations; (b) Ratification of The Hague Convention and
enactment of the Adoption Law. This put an end to the processing of adoptions by
public notaries. It also increased coverage and specialization of the justice system
for children and adolescents and follow-up of their actions and the resulting impact;
(c) Development of a bilingual curriculum for preschool education and a proposal
for a comprehensive early childhood public policy. This was nationally discussed to
create awareness on the importance of giving priority to the country’s i ndigenous
children, and particularly indigenous girls; and (d) A strategy to reduce mother -tochild transmission of HIV, including quick tests for pregnant women during prenatal
visits, treatment for emergencies and at the time of childbirth as well as
comprehensive paediatric diagnosis and care.
16. UNICEF and a group of international development partners and non governmental organizations helped develop a public policy for children and
adolescents in 51 of the 333 municipalities of the country and helped create
municipal councils for children and adolescents in 33 of them. Through these
councils, children and adolescents participate in formulating and following up on
policies. The country has sound decentralization legislation that includes citizen
participation mechanisms capable of promoting public policies in favour of children
and adolescents. In practice, however, the country’s excessive centralization limits
this possibility, inhibiting the most underdeveloped regions from seeking their own
solutions. Where positive results have been achieved, communication has played an
important and strategic role. Through partnerships with the mass media,
$8.3 million was leveraged in free airtime in 2008 for broadcasting television
programmes, campaigns and other communication events that helped promote a
rights-based culture.
Lessons learned
17. Following are some of the lessons learned during the country programme of
cooperation.
18. One, it is important for Guatemala to support the fight against impunity.
Investment in legislative reform, security and justice, and thus progress for children,
cannot be sustained without it. Coordinated action with the diplomatic missions has
yielded good results, and this experience should be extended to other issues.
Monitoring of the implementation of the laws is a priority.
19. Two, specific strategies should be extended, including coverage of
decentralized health services, establishment of a nutritional surveillance system,
early detection of HIV through quick tests, impr oved sanitary conditions in schools

6

and disaster response and preparedness. Partners in strengthening these strategies
are the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization and the World
Bank.
20. Three, to achieve a substantive improvement in children’s educational
achievement, steps must be taken to ensure that all girls and boys, particularly
indigenous children, receive at least one year of preschool education, start school at
the appropriate age, finish primary school and learn in their mother tongue.
21. Four, to broaden the scope of municipal policies that favour the rights of
children and adolescents, the scale of interventions needs to be expanded in
coordination with private and public institutions, development banks and
international organizations.
22. Fifth, collaboration by United Nations agencies in developing proposals for the
Millennium Development Goals-United Nations Development Programme thematic
windows has proved very positive, making it one of the best United Nations
coherence practices. In addition to its financial advantages, this coordination is a
practical way of linking each agency’s work based on clearly defined objectives.

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health, nutrition and water,
sanitation and hygiene

1 887

13 680

15 567

Protection and education

1 468

11 390

12 858

Adolescent development

518

4 280

4 798

Cross-sectoral costs

357

650

1 007

4 230

30 000

34 230

Total

Preparation process
23. In June 2007, the United Nations Country Team agreed to extend the duration
of the 2005-2008 cooperation cycle until the end of 2009 as a bridge to enable
preparation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) in
coordination with the elected officials who would take office in January 2008.
Preparation of the new Common Country Assessment /UNDAF began in April 2008
and continued in 2009. The UNDAF was signed on 22 June 2009.
24. In 2008, UNICEF participated in preparing the 2010 -2014 programme. The
2007 midterm review and the medium-term strategic plan for 2006-2009 were the
starting point for discussions on developing the programme in coordination with the
recently created International Cooperation Council. It includes the Presidential
Secretariat for Planning and Programming, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
Ministry of Finance and a representative of the Presidency of the Republic. Key
ministries were also consulted to ensure alignment of the plans. The work also

7

involved discussion with the main bilateral donors and civil society partners, who
all made valuable contributions.
25. The programme aims to protect the rights of children, adolescents and women
in Guatemala, in the context of the global economic crisis. It reflects the objectives
of supporting a democratic and pluralistic society, avoiding discrimination and
making clear progress towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and reduction of impunity.
26. The 2010-2014 programme will be implemented in the framework of the
UNDAF, in coordination with Governmental and non-governmental partners; United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes; and donors. It will give priority to the
indigenous and particularly to indigenous girls. Working at national and
departmental levels, the programme will emphasize the 130 municipalities that have
been prioritized by the national Government as part of its poverty reduction strategy.
27. The following are the expected results: (a) in the 130 municipalities the
number of pregnant women, mothers and children under 6 who have access to
comprehensive, quality and respectful health services has increased by 10 per cent;
(b) in the 130 municipalities chronic malnutrition in children under 5 has been
reduced by 10 per cent; safe water and sanitation services are accessible for girls
and boys; and they practice good hygiene; (c) 50 per cent of the indigenous children
in five departments have finished quality primary education; (d) 60 per cent of the
indigenous children in five departments have access to quality preschool education;
(e) access to the integrated care package for preventing mother-to-child transmission
of HIV has increased for at least 40 per cent of HIV-positive women who receive
prenatal care, and 80 per cent of children born to HIV-positive mothers have access
to quality paediatric care; (f) in the 130 municipalities at least 300,000 adolescents
have the necessary skills to reduce HIV risk and vulnerability; (g) in the
130 municipalities children and adolescents have access to prevention and care
programmes for victims of violence; (h) all girls and boys are protected by an
adoption system that ensures their right to a family; (i) children and adolescents
have access to a quality, specialized justice system; (j) in 20 municipalities children
and adolescents have access to a comprehensive protection system; (k) all the
130 municipalities monitor the well-being of children and adolescents and
implement programmes that guarantee their rights; (l) comprehensive state
monitoring and evaluation systems are strengthened at the local, departmental and
national level to effectively support evidence-based planning and evaluation; and
(m) public investment in children and adolescents is increased to reduce subnational coverage disparities in key sectors.
28. The programme will promote implementation of a rights-based approach for
children and adolescents throughout the life cycle. This will involve (a) a
population, intercultural and gender approach that focuses on actions favouring the
rights of children, adolescents and women; (b) generation of knowledge on
children’s rights as a tool for action, to support decision-making and develop a more
solid basis for programme action and advocacy; (c) capacity-building of
Government entities, NGOs and community-based organizations; (d) promotion of
public policies that emphasize decentralized action (at the municipal level) and
improved public education; (e) strengthening of the famil y as the most appropriate
protective environment for children’s development; (f) promotion of participation
by civil society, girls and women, in particular with regard to asserting their rights

8

in the fight against impunity; and (g) communication and soci al mobilization based
on evidence and the results of monitoring and evaluation.
29. Communication actions will be strengthened to improve citizens’ knowledge,
attitudes and practices. The cooperation will also support coordination of emergency
preparedness and response actions, risk reduction and adequate preparedness and
emergency response capacity, based on a human rights approach emphasizing
populations that are affected or at risk. Special emphasis will be placed on the
responsibilities of UNICEF, in coordination with the water, sanitation and hygiene,
education, protection and nutrition sectors.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
30. The Government’s policy priorities for 2008-2012 are population and
development and ethnic and gender equality. Other priorities are (a) rural
development; (b) conversion of the national energy matrix to renewable energy
sources; (c) revitalization of the Development Council system working at regional
and local levels to promote community involvement and participation in decisionmaking processes; and (d) geographic focus of interventions by territorial
assignment of public strategies and policies. National priorities are linked with the
areas of cooperation in the UNDAF: (i) the environment, disaster ris k management
and water and sanitation management; (ii) social development, including health,
education and economic opportunity; (iii) governance and citizen participation;
(iv) food security and nutrition; and (v) the rule of law, security and justice.
31. Additionally, the Government has said that its administration will be based on
four strategic programmes: (a) solidarity and human loyalty; (b) governance and
civic loyalty; (c) productivity and economic loyalty; and (d) regional scope and
loyalty among inhabitants. In this framework, the four fundamental work areas are
security, rural development, social investments (especially in favour of women and
children) and housing. As part of the United Nations system, UNICEF has
participated in discussions with the Government to ensure coherence among the
objectives contemplated by the Government and the objectives of the 2010 -2014
country programme.
Relationship to international priorities
32. The frameworks for the programme are the Convention on the Righ ts of the
Child; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women; the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; the Durban
Declaration; United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
UNICEF Core Commitments for Children in Emergencies; the United Nations
Secretary-General’s Study on Violence against Children; the goals of the United
Nations General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS; Education for All; the
Millennium Development Goals; and the Millennium Declaration. The programme
will serve as a tool to facilitate implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child (2001).
Programme components
33. The proposed programme is fully consistent with the challenges i dentified by
the Common Country Assessment/UNDAF. The four components of the 2010 -2014
cooperation programme are as follows:

9

34. Health, nutrition, water and sanitation. The objective is to contribute to
reduced morbidity and mortality among the newborn, children and women of
reproductive age. The health component will focus on neonatal, child and maternal
health. It will support national efforts to improve access to skilled delivery care and
assistance, comprehensive attention to childhood diseases, univer sal screening of
pregnant women to prevent transmission of HIV from mother to child, and access to
treatment for infected children.
35. The nutrition component will focus on improving living conditions of children
under 6 and pregnant and breastfeeding wo men to reduce chronic malnutrition
levels. It will support implementation of the national strategy for reduction of
chronic malnutrition and, with other United Nations system agencies, of the
Millennium Development Goals thematic funds on children, food se curity and
nutrition (MDG Achievement Fund). The water, sanitation and hygiene components
will focus on facilitating demonstration systems in schools and communities to
improve access to services and adaptability to climate change. Community
participation will be organized to improve the environment.
36. In view of the prevailing inequality, the programme will give priority to
regions with indigenous rural and poor populations. It will promote coordination
among State actors to encourage comprehensive approaches for public and private
action. It will promote joint actions by the Ministries of Health and Education, the
Food and Nutritional Security Secretariat and other social protection agencies, such
as the Social Welfare Secretariat and the First Lady’s Social Affairs Secretariat. It
will develop advocacy, information, communication, education and social
mobilization processes by working with the media and alternative communication
systems, such as interpersonal communication involving community/family
traditions and practices, to strengthen the political agenda on issues involving early
childhood. It will strengthen follow-up and evaluation; promote behaviour change to
deal with the economic crisis in the context of the free health care policy and the
drop in tax revenues; and it will incorporate communication on emergency
prevention, preparedness and response linked with health, nutrition and basic
sanitation.
37. Education and protection. The programme will aim to help ensure quality
basic education that is culturally relevant and to protect and restore the rights of
children and adolescents. UNICEF will focus on the most vulnerable and
marginalized sectors of society, particularly the indigenous and girls in rural areas,
emphasizing inclusion, educational assistance and protection.
38. The education component will address early and preschool education,
intercultural bilingual education in primary school, educational management in
municipalities, participation of indigenous children and adolescents, and di saster
risk management. The main activities will include technical assistance to implement
bilingual intercultural education policies, education for peace and citizenship, and
training of adolescent leaders, teachers and parents. Emphasis will be given to
municipal actions to increase completion of primary education, expand non -formal
early education models, conduct studies, surveys and baseline studies, disseminate
knowledge and increase awareness-raising about intercultural bilingual education. A
community-based monitoring system will be developed and applied to reinforce
indigenous demands for intercultural bilingual education, with a focus on increased
coverage.

10

39. The protection component will further build on the recommendations of the
Study on Violence and on the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Violence against Children. It will concentrate on developing the
protection system at national and municipal levels; prevention of family violence,
sexual exploitation and trafficking that affects children; strengthening of national
institutions; harmonization of laws with international instruments, including
approval of laws on arms/munitions and criminal investigation; and initiatives for
working with adolescents at risk. Protection activities cover training and capacity
building for officials and technicians of protection agencies, technical assistance in
the field, lobbying of decision-makers and studies, including baseline studies and
communication actions. The programme will develop monitoring and evaluation
systems with civil society participation to monitor passage and implementation of
laws. The communication strategy will work towards universal preschool and
primary education; eradication of dangerous child labour; social mobilization to
fight impunity in crimes against children; and development of local protection
systems. Emphasis will be placed on ensuring children’s protection in emergencies.
40. Adolescent development. The programme seeks comprehensive and
differentiated care for adolescents, as well as opportunities for full participation
using creative approaches. It will concentrate on facilitating access to health
services, formal education, comprehensive pregnancy care, Education for Life,
participation in community social development and access to reproductive health
services. The communication and risk prevention component will emphasize
prevention of early pregnancies and adolescent maternal deaths; prevention and
treatment of sexually transmitted infections/HIV; and prevention of violence, abuse,
ill treatment and exploitation along with strengthening the system that assists
adolescents in conflict with the law. It will promote leadership in the cultural, social
and economic areas, taking advantage of experience acquired, especially by
indigenous peoples. To enlarge the scale of the adolescent programme, a more
dynamic cooperation mechanism between UNICEF and multilateral as well as
bilateral donors will be pursued in order to generate synergies.
41. The programme will give priority to the use of alternative communication
systems and access to relevant knowledge in the context of crisis, insecurity and
impunity. A youth-friendly approach will be followed in working with marginalized
indigenous adolescents affected by traditional family practices, who live in unsafe,
vulnerable areas and are excluded from education. The programme will promote
policies that consider ethnic origin and gender, the right to education for pregnant
adolescent girls, protection against exploitation in domestic work, raising the legal
age for marriage, and the creation of safe spaces for adolescents for counselling and
support. Emphasis will be given to communication for development and advocacy,
mobilization, partnerships, use of new technologies and promotion of behaviour
change and citizen participation, focusing on work with and for adolescents.
Research will be carried out to clarify levels of adolescent marginalization and
exclusion. The use of the mass media and alternative means of com munication will
be promoted; management of knowledge with adolescents; production of
multimedia materials; and strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation systems
to aid in measuring progress. Adolescents will receive training in disaster
prevention, preparedness and response.
42. Cross-sectoral component. This includes all activities that support
implementation of the programme, including salaries for staff performing cross -

11

cutting functions associated with supplies, information technologies,
communications, public policy development promotion, monitoring and evaluation,
and coordination.
Major partnerships
43. The main partners for programme implementation will be the Ministries of
Education, Justice, Public Health and Social Assistance; the Judic iary; the Social
Welfare Secretariat; the Office of the Solicitor General of the Nation; the Food and
Nutrition Security Secretariat; and municipalities. Other key partners will be
members of non-governmental organizations; community associations and selec ted
faith-based organizations; indigenous and Afro-descendant movements; private
sector institutions; and the mass media. The development of mechanisms to
facilitate the participation and voice of girls, boys, adolescents and women will be
given priority in implementing the programme.
44. The country programme will benefit from the experience and expertise of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes that participate in the UNDAF and
will cooperate through inter-agency thematic groups. Likewise, the programme will
liaise with multilateral and bilateral donors to coordinate relevant interventions.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The Presidential Secretariat of Planning and Programming is the Governmental
institution responsible for coordinating implementation of this country programme.
An intersectoral mechanism will be established, involving the Presidential
Secretariat of Planning and Programming, UNICEF and other partners. Annual work
plans will be prepared jointly by the Government, other partners and UNICEF.
46. An Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be elaborated, and all
country programme components will be jointly reviewed yearly. Disaggregated data
will be collected and disseminated, demonstrating progress in th e 130 selected
municipalities. UNICEF will participate in the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation
processes through the inter-agency thematic groups.
47. All communication and reporting activities will be evidence informed and
multi-level in terms of accountabilities: (a) funds and resources and their impact on
UNICEF supported activities; (b) funds and resources and their impact on activities
foreseen in the UNDAF; and (c) social, humanitarian and developmental
programmes linked to the Millennium Development Goals and the Millennium
agenda.

12

