Honduras
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Honduras
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.19) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

3.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

30

Underweight (% moderate and severe)
(% urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2006)

8
5/11, 16/2
110 a
77/80 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

76

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

86

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

71

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

0.8

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2002)

16

Birth registration (%, under 5 years)

94

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

93/94, 95/93, 92/96
1 820

One-year-olds immunized against diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus (%)

98

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

99

†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.unicef.org/infobycountry/honduras_statistics.html.
110 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the World Health
Organization/UNICEF/United Nations Population Fund and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths: http://www.childinfo.org maternal_mortality.html.
Database.

The situation of children and women
1.
There are 3.3 million Hondurans under 18 years of age, accounting for 44 per
cent of the country’s total population, according to National Institute of Statistics
figures for 2009. Forty-nine per cent of Hondurans under the age of 18 are girls. The
breakdown by age group is as follows: (a) children between 0 and 5 years of age,
28 per cent; (b) children between 6 and 12 years of age, 42 per cent; and
(c) adolescents between 13 and 17 years of age, 30 per cent. The base of the
population pyramid is gradually narrowing as a result of the reduction in the
Honduran fertility rate over recent years, to 3.3 children per woman in 2006.
However, this reduction is not homogeneous across the country. Some rural areas
still have a fertility rate of 5 children per woman.
2.
The indigenous and Afro-Honduran population, of 800,000 people, constitutes
10 per cent of the country’s total population, according to National Institute of
Statistics estimates for 2008. This population comprises seven indigenous peoples —
the Maya Chortí and Lenca peoples in western Honduras; the Pech in the
Departments of Gracias a Dios, Olancho and Yoro; the Tolupanes in the tropical
rainforests of Olancho, Yoro and Francisco Morazán; the Nahua, also in Olancho;
and the Miskito and Tawahka peoples, based in the Moskitia area of Gracia s a Dios

2

Department — and two Afro-Honduran peoples, the Garífuna people, on the Atlantic
coast, and an English-speaking population, in Islas de la Bahía.
3.
Monetary poverty fell by 4.9 per cent between 2001 and 2009. However, the
pace of reduction must accelerate if Honduras is to meet its Millennium
Development Goal target of halving the proportion of people living in monetary
poverty to 37.4 per cent and the proportion living in extreme poverty to 27.1 per
cent by 2015. Honduras is a country of major inequalities, reflected in a Gini
coefficient of 0.525 in 2009, according to the National Institute of Statistics.
Monetary poverty has a significant impact on Honduran children and adolescents: it
affects 53.7 per cent of children under 6 years old, 55.7 per cent of school-age
children and 47 per cent of adolescents. These percentages relate to national
averages.
4.
The under-5 mortality rate decreased to 30 per 1,000 live births in 2009. The
target for 2015 is 18 per 1,000 live births. The infant mortality rate, which was 23 per
1,000 live births in 2009, should reach 12 per 1,000 live births by 2015. Although the
trends are positive, they hide disparities that affect children in rural areas and
indigenous children. Acute respiratory infections and dehydration from diarrhoea are
still the main causes of death among these children. Although national water and
sanitation coverage has significantly increased in recent years, approximately one
million children still lack access to these services, particularly in rural areas.
5.
With regard to global child malnutrition, the target for 2015 is 10.7 per cent,
which has not yet been achieved in rural areas. However, chronic malnutrition was
estimated at 27.4 per cent in 2006, and the target for 2015 is 21.2 per cent . Honduras
must meet the challenge of achieving this goal by intensively and creatively
promoting breastfeeding and the use of weaning food. According to The State of the
World’s Children 2009, in Honduras only 1 in 5 newborns is breastfed within the
first hour of birth, while 70 per cent of infants less than 6 months old are not
exclusively breastfed. The same document indicates that 53 per cent of children
aged 4 and 5 months are bottle-fed and a third of infants between 6 and 9 months of
age are not appropriately fed with a combination of breast milk and semi -solid
foods. With regard to civil registration, the right of children to a name and
nationality is not yet universal in Honduras. The current civil registration system
does not incorporate information on the various actions carried out by the State in
respect of each child, but the digital nature of the system would allow a single
national information and identification system to be created.
6.
Although the country has made early childhood a priority, only 45 per cent of
children between 4 and 5 years of age are enrolled in preschool education. The
preschool attendance rate is even lower among children living in rural areas. The
country needs to make special efforts to achieve its primary school enrol ment and
retention targets through its Education for All Strategy, which enjoys considerable
international support. A positive development is that boys and girls now have equal
opportunities in terms of primary education and girls outnumber boys at the
secondary level. The lowest school enrolment and retention rates occur among
indigenous children, children who start work at a young age, particularly in rural
areas, and children with some kind of disability. The country’s statistical report on
school-age children with disabilities and special educational needs, updated in 2010,
shows that only 43 per cent of girls and 57 per cent of boys with disabilities are in
the school system.

3

7.
Honduran adolescents have limited access to education. Only 6 out of 10
adolescents are in school. The early entry of male and female adolescents into the
labour market denies them educational opportunities and other social benefits.
Adolescents begin working at an average age of 14.3 years, particularly in rural
areas.
8.
Adolescents and young people are frequently victims of violence. They often
adopt cultural values that encourage aggressive behaviour. This situation imposes
serious limitations on citizenship building and integral human development, as
stated in the 2008-2009 national human development report. Almost half of the
victims of homicides in the 2007-2009 period were aged between 15 and 29. An
average of seven young people per day suffered violent deaths in 2010. A study of
gangs conducted in 2010 estimated that more than 5,000 adolescents and young
people aged between 14 and 25 years old, including 900 female adolescents, were
members of those groups. Such adolescents and young people have low levels of
education and have often been victims of domestic violence. Accor ding to the
special criminal justice system for adolescents in conflict with the law, adolescents
should be sentenced to prison only as a last resort. However, imprisonment is in fact
the most widespread means of punishing criminal offences. Much remains t o be
done in terms of preventing social violence against adolescents and expanding the
range of options for the social reintegration of adolescents who have broken the law.
9.
Risk-taking behaviours by adolescents remain a significant challenge for the
country. Early pregnancy, which affected 21.5 per cent of all adolescents aged
between 15 and 19 years in 2006, is attributable, among other factors, to the lack of
adequate information on sexual and reproductive health and the fact that young
people are becoming sexually active at increasingly young ages: an average of 16
years for women and 14 years for men. Half of male adolescents, and a third of
females, have unprotected sex. Two of every three new HIV/AIDS infections occur
in the 15- to 25-year age group.
10. In order to ensure the effective exercise of children’s rights, the country is
seeking to align its national legislation, particularly the Code on Childhood and
Adolescence, with the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Notable in this regard is the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child that Honduras should strengthen public institutions related to children, such as
the Honduras Institute of Children and the Family. It is also recommended that the
information systems relating to children’s rights to health, education, nutrition and
protection should be coordinated to facilitate decision-making. An important task
will be to disseminate the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. In 2010, Honduras created a Ministry of Human
Rights and a Ministry for the Advancement of Indigenous and Afro -Honduran
Peoples. The coordinated work of these two bodies constitutes an opportunity to
promote children’s and adolescents’ rights.
11. Honduras is extremely vulnerable to natural hazards, including tropical storms
and hurricanes, which affect most parts of the country, causing floods and
landslides. Some regions are also affected by droughts, which result in food
shortages. Recurrent emergencies leave little time for those affected to recover
economically, which worsens the vicious cycle of poverty, particularly in the case of
children and women.

4

12. The proportion of public investment allocated to children in Honduras has not
undergone significant variations. It rose from 8.08 per cent in 2007 to 8.28 per cent
in 2008. Bearing in mind that the country spent 199 dollars per child in 2008, which
is below the regional average, according to United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) estimates, there is clearly still a large gap in funding for children’s
programmes.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
13. Honduras has achieved a significant reduction in the under-5 mortality rate,
which is now on track to meet the Millennium Development Goal target of 18 per
1,000 live births by 2015. The country has assumed full control of the process for
maintaining high levels of immunization coverage. It has added vaccinations against
pneumococcus and rotavirus with the support of UNICEF, the Pan American Health
Organization and other key actors in international cooperation.
14. The country has made very significant progress in reducing mother-to-child
transmission of HIV/AIDS. During the cooperation period, there was a substantial
increase in the number of pregnant women attending health clinics for HIV testing.
A total of 126,000 pregnant women were tested for HIV/AIDS in 2010. The country
has also increased its antiretroviral treatment coverage, both adult and paediatric,
and major efforts are being made to institutionalize the national response, with the
support of UNICEF, the United Nations system, the Global Fund, the United States
Agency for International Development and the United States Centers f or Disease
Control and Prevention. In addition, the country, which has an HIV/AIDS
prevalence rate of 0.8 per cent, has made significant efforts to prevent new
infections among adolescents and young people, especially at the municipal level.
15. The country has established mechanisms for monitoring children’s rights by
means of an observatory that forms part of the Government structure. Data are
analysed by age group and department. A child rights index has been created, which
has made it possible to understand and focus attention on the situation of children at
the local and national levels, and to familiarize children and adolescents with their
rights.
Lessons learned
16. In the context of implementing the cooperation programme, comprehensive
early childhood care was successfully prioritized on the national agenda, thanks to
technical assistance and advocacy and promotion activities, and it was agreed that
this issue should be incorporated in the three fundamental documents that govern
the country’s future development: the Vision for the Country, the National Plan and
the Government Plan. As a result, a comprehensive early childhood care policy and
national plan are being prepared, with the extensive participation of public and
non-governmental institutions. The new cooperation programme will continue to
provide strong support in this area.
17. The coordination of efforts and resources between the United Nations system
and the Government is producing results at the national level. The participation of

5

UNICEF and the United Nations system in the Honduran Government ’s Joint
Programme for Economic Governance of Water and Sanitation has been a
productive and enriching experience. It has demonstrated that coordination between
various institutional mandates leads to high-impact political and programmatic
decision-making, for example in national policy formulation, empowerment of
municipalities and support for the planning agency, the National Drinking Water and
Sanitation Council, within the framework of the General Water and Sanitation Act.
18. By strengthening and coordinating the capacity of various institutions involved
in the protection of children’s and adolescents’ rights, it has been possible to address
the complexity and multicausality of phenomena such as the abuse, exploitation and
violence affecting Honduran children and adolescents. A system for the protection
of children’s and adolescents’ rights, involving the three branches of Government
and non-governmental organizations, has been established, with UNICEF support.
The institutions that are part of the system have successfully regionalized and
coordinated their services in Honduras in order to prevent and address violations of
children’s and adolescents’ rights.
Country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Young child survival and development

825

4 000

4 825

Access to quality education and protection of children’s
and adolescents’ rights

850

3 000

3 850

1 325

2 000

3 325

750

1 000

1 750

3 750

10 000

13 750

Programme

Monitoring of children’s rights and social policies
Cross-sectoral and operational costs
Total

Programme preparation process
19. The preparation of the country programme has taken account of the following
documents and inputs: (a) key results and lessons learned from the 2009 midterm
review; (b) 2007 observations and recommendations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discriminat ion against
Women; (c) priorities established in the Vision for the Country (2010 -2038),
National Plan (2010-2022) and Government Plan (2010-2014); (d) common country
assessment and United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF)
2012-2016; (e) third country report on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
2010; (f) situation analysis of the children and adolescents of Honduras, in terms of
life cycle and human rights, UNICEF, 2010; and (g) UNICEF meetings with the
Honduran State institutions, coordinated and hosted by the Technical Secretariat for
Planning and External Cooperation (SEPLAN), as well as with civil society
organizations and representatives of international cooperation agencies and agencies
of the United Nations system.

6

Goals, key results and strategies
20. The overall objective of the country programme is for the country to have
made significant progress by 2016 towards the universal realization of children’s
and adolescents’ rights, through the strengthening of policies to achie ve the MDGs
with equity, in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, and in conformity with country priorities.
21. The expected outcomes of the programme by 2016 are as follows: (a) a
national policy for children under 5 will have been consolidated and brought into
effect, in coordination with other policies related to early childhood in the areas of
health, nutrition and social protection; (b) at least 80 per cent of children under 5
will have access to comprehensive care ensuring their survival and full
development, with a particular emphasis on priority municipalities; * (c) a national
policy will have been established to improve education quality through
decentralization, with an inclusive approach. Efforts will be made to ensure that
85 per cent of children between 4 and 5 years of age have access to preschool
education, 97 per cent of children from the selected municipalit ies have access to
quality primary education and at least 90 per cent of enrolled children complete
primary education; (d) adolescents, especially those exposed to vulnerabilities who
live in poor urban areas and those belonging to indigenous or Afro -Honduran
populations, will acquire life skills and empowerment, as well as share in the
recognition of their rights and the realization of their potential through learning
opportunities; (e) the country will have a child and adolescent rights monitoring
system, emphasizing fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goal targets, at the
national and municipal levels, with disaggregated indicators; and (f) the country will
have a system for the analysis and periodic evaluation of social policies with a
major impact on children and adolescents, particularly the most vulnerable and
socially excluded.
22. The programme has a human rights-, gender- and equity-based approach. In
order to achieve the above-mentioned outcomes, the following strategies will be
applied: (a) State and civil society capacity-building at the national and municipal
levels; (b) continued systematic monitoring of children’s and adolescents’ rights, at
the national and municipal levels, in relation to the MDGs and in the context of the
decentralization policy being promoted by the State; (c) forging of strategic
alliances to promote public policies and investment in children and adolescents;
(d) promotion of participation by children, adolescents and women in their family,
educational and community environments; (e) fostering of South-South cooperation
to promote the implementation of innovative alternatives for the comprehensive care
of children and adolescents; (f) prioritization of vulnerable groups in preparing and
managing disaster prevention and mitigation plans at the national and local levels
and, in emergency response, taking account of the Core Commitments for Children
in Humanitarian Action; (g) use of communication for development in order to
guide rights-holders and duty-bearers with a view to achieving the universal
application of the rights in question; (h) understanding of the difficulties
encountered in realizing the rights of indigenous and Afro -Honduran populations
and persons with disabilities, promotion of inclusive policies and beha vioural
* The prioritization of municipalities in which the programme will operate will be based on the
country’s poverty indices, human development indices and the percentage of indigenous and
Afro-Honduran peoples. It will take place in the context of groupings of municipalities.

7

changes on certain issues; (i) incorporation of a gender perspective in gathering data
on, implementing, monitoring and evaluating the measures that form part of the
programme, as well as the disaggregation of indicators by rural/urban areas in ord er
to establish which populations are the most excluded, where they are located and
what are the causes of their exclusion.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
23. National priorities have been taken into account in preparing the new country
programme: (a) emphasis on comprehensive care for mothers and babies, in
accordance with the Maternal and Child Mortality Reduction Strategy; reduction of
global and chronic malnutrition, as envisaged in the National Food and Nutritional
Security Strategy; (b) importance of quality education for all, including indigenous
and Afro-Honduran children and children with disabilities; (c) the “Bono Diez Mil”
programme, a national programme of conditional cash transfers, linked to
improvements in education, health and nutrition, for families living in extreme
poverty; (d) protection of adolescents from all forms of violence, exploitation and
abuse; and (e) promotion of the importance of child and adolescent participation at
home, at school and in the community.
24. The UNICEF cooperation programme is aligned with the UNDAF outcomes
for 2012-2016, which are as follows: (a) within the framework of social rights and
the MDGs, to contribute to a Honduras without extreme poverty, with an educated
and healthy population and robust social protection systems; (b) within the
framework of civil and political rights, to contribute to a Honduras that is
developing in democracy, with security and without violence, and to a modern,
transparent, responsible, efficient and competitive State; and (c) within the
framework of economic rights and environmental conventions, to contribute to a
productive Honduras that creates decent work, exploits its natural resources in an
integrated and sustainable manner and reduces the risks of disa sters associated with
its environmental vulnerability.
Relationship to international priorities
25. The cooperation programme is aligned with the MDGs and with the priorities
highlighted in the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan 2006-2013. The programme
takes into account the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child
and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Programme components
26. The components of the cooperation programme are: (a) young child surviv al
and development; (b) access to quality education and protection of children’s and
adolescents’ rights; and (c) monitoring of children’s rights and social policies.
Component A. Young child survival and development
27. The programme will contribute to the formulation, implementation and
monitoring of the national policy for early childhood care, which must be
coordinated with other national policies on health, education and social protection.
In the selected municipalities, efforts will be made to find better ways of providing
comprehensive care to children under 5, in order to ensure their appropriate
physical, mental and social development. The programme will contribute to a

8

reduction in infant mortality. Exclusive breastfeeding in the first six mo nths of a
child’s life will be encouraged. The programme will also help to advise families on
how to avoid chronic malnutrition, which currently affects 27.4 per cent of the
under-5 population, or 250,000 children, including through the development of
complementary foods, since only 56 per cent of infants aged 6 to 8 months receive
semi-solid food, and 40 per cent do not receive such food within their first year. It
will help to improve access by vulnerable populations to water and sanitation
services, especially in rural areas, where 23 per cent of people lack access to water
and 38 per cent to sanitation, affecting some 670,000 children. Bearing in mind that
6 per cent of births are not registered, the programme will contribute to achieving
the universal civil registration of children. In order to achieve individualized
information on the sectoral measures taken by the State in respect of each child, it
will support the establishment of a national early childhood register. It will also help
to ensure that the family environment is appropriate, caring and non-violent, in
order to encourage the healthy development of mothers and babies.
28. The programme will help to establish alternative approaches for the
comprehensive care of children aged between 2 and 5 where this is required by their
specific family situations, such as cases where the parents work outside the home
and leave children alone or in the care of siblings, or where the mother is an
adolescent. Adolescent mothers currently account for 21.5 per c ent of births in
Honduras.
Component B. Access to quality education and protection of children’s and
adolescents’ rights
29. The programme will contribute to the achievement of the goal of access to
preschool education for 85 per cent of children aged 4 and 5 through advocacy at
the family, local and national levels. The programme will help to increase the school
enrolment rate from 90 per cent to 93 per cent, supporting the education
decentralization strategy and ensuring that this does not increase g eographical
disparities. It will emphasize the importance of identifying children who are
excluded from education and bringing them into the system. There are currently
some 117,800 out-of-school children, representing 6 per cent of the total school -age
population: those who live in rural areas and work, those belonging to indigenous
peoples and those with disabilities. It will seek to ensure that boys and girls
successfully complete the sixth grade of primary education; only 163,855 students,
or 69 per cent of the school-age population, completed the sixth grade in 2009. In
order to improve school retention rates for indigenous children, it will support the
establishment and development of a bilingual intercultural educational environment.
It will advocate for flexible alternatives to guarantee the continued right to
education for children who work. It will advocate for the entry into the education
system of at least 16,564 girls and boys with disabilities, who are currently excluded
from school. It will contribute to the establishment of a national quality certification
system for schools. It will also help to improve the quality, timeliness and reliability
of statistical information on the educational system and contribute to the continuous
improvement of the national school register.
30. The cooperation programme will help to form a positive social image of
adolescents, at the national and local levels, highlighting their inalienable right to
education as a factor fostering their physical, mental and civic development.
Indigenous adolescents and their specific characteristics will be included. The

9

programme will address the social violence, abuse, exploitation and trafficking
suffered by the adolescent population, with a view to preventing negative effects o n
their development, and will support the implementation of a special justice system
for criminal offences committed by them. The programme will also address
HIV/AIDS prevention and teenage pregnancy. In order to take forward the above mentioned measures, it will seek to forge strategic alliances with social
communication media.
Component C. Monitoring of children’s rights and social policies
31. The programme will contribute to the systematic monitoring of children’s and
adolescents’ rights at the national, regional and local levels, with an emphasis on
fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goal targets with equity, supporting the
implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child, in order for the Government to be in a position to comply with
international standards. Knowledge generation on children and their rights is at the
heart of this programme. It will contribute to strengthening and continuously
updating the National System of Information on Childhood and Ad olescence, at the
national and local levels, which includes the concluding observations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child. It will promote extensive use of the DevInfo
system to disseminate the information obtained. The programme will contribute to
the formulation, monitoring and, when required by the Government, evaluation of
social programmes and policies. It will also measure and analyse social investment
for the benefit of children and adolescents. The programme will systematically
listen to girls, boys and adolescents, encouraging their participation as a means of
fostering their personal and collective development and a factor indispensable in
formulating policies and programmes for their benefit.
Cross-sectoral and operational costs
32. This component covers cross-cutting themes such as planning, monitoring and
evaluation of cooperation; development communication; the appropriate
incorporation of the gender perspective; the preparation and management of disaster
prevention and mitigation plans; and emergency response. It will support the
implementation of communication strategies in support of all priority components of
the programme.
Major partnerships
33. For the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the cooperation
programme, UNICEF will strengthen partnerships with the three branches of
Government — executive, legislative and judicial — at the national and local levels.
34. The Technical Secretariat for Planning and External Cooperation plays a key
role in the overall monitoring of the cooperation of UNICEF with the country. The
Ministries of Health and Social Development, the National Registry of Persons and
the Honduras Institute of Children and the Family are key for the promotion of
integrated early childhood development. The Ministry of Education and the Ministry
of Culture, Arts and Sports are crucial for guaranteeing the right of children and
adolescents to education. The Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry for the
Advancement of Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples, together with the National

10

Congress and the judiciary, are important allies in ensuring that the rights of
children and adolescents are protected.
35. The National Institute of Statistics is responsible for the National Information
System, working in partnership with academics and research institutes.
36. Alliances will be established with the Association of Municipalities of
Honduras and the Ministry of the Interior and Population. Close relations will be
maintained with the national commissions for HIV/AIDS care, breastfeeding
support, and food and nutritional security, and with the Permanent Contingency
Commission, among others.
37. UNICEF will work together with the agencies of the United Nations system,
both resident and non-resident in the country. It will seek the cooperation of the
international financial system, particularly the Inter-American Development Bank,
the World Bank and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
38. UNICEF will endeavour to build closer collaborative relatio nships with donor
countries. It will aim to maintain and expand its cooperative relationships with the
National Committees for UNICEF. It will actively promote South -South
cooperation. It will seek to coordinate activities with civil society organizations, the
business sector and social communication media.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
39. The programme will design and implement mechanisms for monitoring and
evaluating the intermediate and final outcomes of cooperation. Monitoring wi ll be
carried out at two levels, first, to ensure the internal coherence of the programmes
being implemented, and second, to ensure that the outcomes of each programme are
achieved.
40. A plan to monitor and evaluate fulfilment of the goals and targets of the
cooperation period will be prepared. The Government of Honduras and UNICEF
will carry out a midterm review of programme implementation in 2014 and a final
evaluation at the end of the cooperation period, in 2016.

11

