India
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for India
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.11) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

Basic data †
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2005-2006)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2008)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2007-2008)

447
63
43 a
(33/46, 57/20)
230 b
89/87

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005-2006)

95

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

92

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

34

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%,2009)

0.3

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age 2005-2006)

12

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2005-2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

41
(41/41, 59/35, 24/72)
1340

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

72

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

74

†
a
b

Comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org.
Underweight estimates based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
The reported estimate is 212 deaths per 100,000 live births, according to the Special Bulletin
on Maternal Mortality in India, 2007-2009, released in 2011. The estimate of 230 deaths per
100,000 live births is from the Maternal Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts),
adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information,
see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
With 40 per cent of its estimated 1.2 billion population under the age of 18 , 1
India is home to the largest number of children 2 in the world. About half of the
children from poor families belong to disadvantaged groups like Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. 3 India contributes to more than 20 per cent of the world ’s
child deaths, with approximately 1.73 million 4 children dying annually before
completing their fifth birthday.
2.
The gross domestic product has grown at an average of 8.2 5 per cent over the
last five years and the Government’s commitment to ‘inclusive growth’ has resulted
in increased allocations to the social sector. This, combined with a progressive
legislative policy environment, numerous social sector programmes, protection
__________________
1
2
3

4
5

2

Provisional figures, Census 2011.
0-17 years.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are disadvantaged communities accorded special status by the
Constitution of India, along with Other Backward Classes.
UNICEF, The State of the World Children’s Report 2012: Children in an Urban World.
Faster, Sustainable and More Inclusive Growth. An Approach to the 12th Five Year Plan,
Government of India, August 2011.

schemes and local self-governance through the Panchayati Raj system — has helped
improve the lives of India’s children and women.
3.
Economic growth has not yielded commensurate results in the reduction of
poverty and disparity, and as a result achievements have been uneven in meeting the
targets of the Millennium Development Goals. Thirty seven per cent 6 of the
population lives below the national poverty line. This signifies inequities in living
standards with strong correlations between deprivation, discrimination, exclusion
amongst socio-religious groups and disparities along gender and rural -urban lines. A
child born in the poorest household is three times as likely to die before the age of
5 as compared to a child born in the richest household. The under-five mortality
rates for Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes are 96 and 88 deaths per 1,000 live
births, respectively, compared to 60 deaths for the general population. 7 Ten more
girls than boys die before reaching their fifth birthday out of every 1,000 live births,
and among girls there is a sharp drop in attendance between primary and secondary
school. Eight states 8 with the highest under-five mortality rates contribute to 47 per
cent of the population and carry the burden of almost 70 per cent of under-five and
infant deaths.
4.
Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals targets remains uneven.
A 56 per cent decline 9 in child mortality in the 1-4-year age group since 1990
notwithstanding, the overall decline in child mortality has been hindered by subdued
progress in neonatal survival, especially within the first week of birth. To meet the
Millennium Development Goals target on child survival, the health, nutrition and
social status of mothers and infants needs to improve, as does early childhood
feeding, care and development. Equally important is to improve access to, and use
of, quality services. The infant mortality rate (IMR) declined 10 points since 2006,
an average decline of two points per year.
5.
The large scale of maternal and child undernutrition poses a challenge for
India in reaching the Millennium Development Goals on child nutrition, survival
and development. Recent government efforts in restructuring the Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS) and other initiatives exemplify national commitment
to holistic child development.
6.
With a maternal mortality ratio (MMR) of 230 10 deaths per 100,000 live births,
India is making progress on Millennium Development Goal 5. One contributing
factor has been the introduction of a conditional cash transfer scheme, which
improved institutional delivery from 41 per cent in 2005 -2006 to 47 per cent in
2007-2008. However, the quality of maternal care remains a concern.
7.
India has reached the target on access to improved drinking water sources, yet
improving sanitation and drinking water quality remains a huge challenge. Only
31 per cent of the population has access to improved sanitation facilities and more
__________________
6

7
8
9

10

Report of the Expert Group to review the Methodology for Estimation of Poverty , Government of
India, Planning Commission, 2009.
Includes population other than SC, ST and Other Backward Classes.
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
Computing based on 1990 and 2008 figures, Sample Registration System, Registrar General of
India, Government of India.
Refer to the Basic Data Table. According to the Special Bulletin on Maternal Mortality in India
2011, the estimate is 212 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2007-2009.

3

than 600 million people, or 50 per cent of the total population, defecate in the
open. 11 Promoting the use of toilets and quality drinking water are urgent needs.
8.
Progress is evident in universalizing primary education, and India is likely to
achieve this Millennium Development Goal. 12 Enrolment and completion rates of
girls in primary school have improved and are catching up with those of boys, as are
primary and elementary completion rates. In light of the Right of Children to Free
and Compulsory Education Act, the challenges now are sub -optimal learning
achievements and completion of upper primary education, particularly among girls,
children in rural areas and those belonging to minority groups and the poorest
wealth quintiles.
9.
In child protection, issues like child marriage, child labour and gender -biased
sex selection threaten the environment in which children live. Forty three per cent of
women in the 20-24 age group are married before the legal age of 18 years 13 and an
estimated 28 million children in the 5-14 age group are engaged in work. 14 Census
figures show a continued decline in child sex ratios (0-6 age group), from 927 girls
per 1,000 boys in 2001 to 914 girls in 2011.
10. Another important area of concern is children’s rights affected by ethnic
violence and left wing extremism in some areas of states. There is growing concern
on how this affects children, both in terms of access and availability of basic
services and a need for enhancing the protective environment.
11. Recognizing these challenges, the Government of India has implemented
national flagship programmes for education, reproductive and child health, child
development, nutrition, protection and water and sanitation. Restru cturing and
universalizing ICDS to respond to child development challenges provide great
opportunities to accelerate progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
with greater inclusion. Programmes for adolescent girls — the Rajiv Gandhi Scheme
for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls and the Indira Gandhi Matritva
SahyogYojana provide a continuum of care across the life cycle using the ICDS
platform, while provisions in the Right to Education Act, the Integrated Child
Protection Scheme (ICPS) and HIV prevention programme build substantially on
this continuum.
12. Natural disasters severely impede development. There are definite indications
that climate change will increase the frequency and intensity of natural disasters in
the coming years, 15 requiring climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction.

__________________
11
12
13
14

15

4

Joint Monitoring Programme – UNICEF and WHO, 2012.
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg.
District Level Household Survey 3, 2007-2008.
National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 2005-2006 estimates that 11.8 per cent of children are
engaged in work. The population estimate has been taken from the Population Projection Report
by the Office of the Registrar General of India.
Government of India’s National Policy on Disaster Management, 2009.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
13. The current Government of India-UNICEF country programme is closely
aligned to Government’s 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012) and the 2008-2012 United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). It contributed to the 11th
Five Year Plan objectives and the following national policies and schemes through
advocacy, expanded partnerships and the provision of technical assistance:
(a) Support to the National Rural Health Mission and the second phase of the
Reproductive and Child Health programme resulted in increased access to
institutional and community-based maternal, neonatal and child health services. This
contributed to a reduction in the MMR (from 280 16 to 230) and IMR (from 58 to
50). 17 The percentage of fully immunized children increased by 17 percentage points
between 2006 and 2009; 18
(b) Polio cases in India fell from 559 in 2008 to one case in 2011. 19 The
Government of India, in partnership with UNICEF, the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Rotary International and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention contributed to almost universal awareness of the
need to vaccinate all children under 5 against polio;
(c) Rates of early initiation of breastfeeding increased from 25 per cent in
2006 to 34 per cent in 2009, 20 vitamin A supplementation coverage increased from
33 per cent in 2007 21 to 66 per cent in 2009. 22 Access to iodized salt by households
increased from 54 per cent in 2006 to 71 per cent in 2009. 23 WHO Child Growth
Standards were introduced and rolled out in National Rural Health Mission and
ICDS. This, along with the Mother-Child Protection Card helped strengthen the
continuum of care (improved access, utilization, practices and tracking) for the
delivery of essential services to mothers, newborns and children under 3 years of
age. A recent survey indicates a 20 per cent reduction in the proportion of
underweight children in the 100 poorest districts; 24
(d) Operational Guidelines on Facility-based Management of Children with
Severe Acute Malnutrition were issued by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, and Nutrition Guidelines for HIV-Exposed and Infected Children were
launched by the National AIDS Control Organization;

__________________
16

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

See the Basic Data table. Estimates for India were revised by the United Nations Interagency
Group, after successfully advocating for the consideration of the verbal autopsy method adopted
by India’s Sample Registration System.
Sample Registration System, 2005 and 2009.
NFHS 2005-2006 and the Coverage Evaluation Survey (CES) 2010.
National Polio Surveillance Project.
NFHS 2005-2006 and CES 2009.
UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children Report 2009: Maternal and Newborn Health.
UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children Report 2011: Adolescence ‒An Age of Opportunity.
NFHS 2005-2006 and CES 2009.
HUNGaMA (Hunger and Malnutrition) Survey Report 2011. Naandi Foundation. Comparison
with data from District Level Household Survey, 2002-2004.

5

(e) Rural sanitation coverage (toilet construction) increased from 48 per cent
in 2008 to 67 per cent in 2010. 25 Advocacy led to a significant shift in the Total
Sanitation Campaign guidelines to focus on sustained use of sanitation facilities.
This, together with the Nirmal Gram Puraskar (clean village award), contributed to
an increase of 19.7 million new toilet-users per year, 26 of whom 12.8 million are in
rural areas;
(f) The achievements of the Government’s Education for All programme—
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan are evident in improved gross completion rates at the
primary level, which increased from 90 per cent in 2007 -2008 to 98 per cent in
2009-2010. 27 Building on this and benefiting from the investments under the 11th
Five Year Plan, the Right to Education Act was enacted in 2010. Major elements of
the Child-Friendly Schools and Systems Framework have been integrated into Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan, resulting in 470,000 schools in 14 states made more child-friendly
through activity-based learning, improved water, sanitation and hygiene facilities
and the provision of midday meals;
(g) Close collaboration with the National AIDS Control Organization
resulted in increased coverage of services to prevent parent-to-child transmission of
HIV and the launch of early infant diagnosis. This facilitates early treatment with
antiretrovirals, thereby safeguarding infants who are HIV positive;
(h) The Integrated Child Protection Scheme was launched and is being rolled
out across India. This seeks to establish a protective environment for all children,
especially the most vulnerable, and promotes family-based care. Approximately
5 million children in seven child labour‒intensive states are being reached through
integrated child rights interventions. This includes identification of out -of-school
children, provision of quality education and links to social protection schemes ;
(i) Gender issues were mainstreamed into the training and communication
strategy for Census 2011. This helped 2.7 million enumerators and supervisors
collect quality disaggregated data as part of the UNICEF contribution to the joint
United Nations support to the Census. Furthermore, the establishment of a
CensusInfo Dashboard 28 helped to make disaggregated data more user-friendly;
(j) UNICEF supported the Ministry of Women and Child Development to
develop the Third and Fourth Periodic Reports and the Initial Reports on the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two Optional
Protocols, respectively. This was done through a participatory process, involving
both government and civil society;
(k) Critical behaviours identified in Facts for Life and prioritized by the
Government’s national programmes were packaged into a daily tele -serial,
Kyunki…Jeena Issi Ka Naam Hai (Because…that’s what life is!). The
entertainment-education serial reached 145 million viewers, including 61 per cent of
women between the ages of 15-34 in hard-to-reach areas of Hindi-speaking states;
__________________
25
26
27

28

6

Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India, www.ddws.nic.in.
2000-2008, Joint Monitoring Programme 2010.
Flash Statistics, Elementary Education in India, District Information for Systems in Educati on
2009-2010. Completion rate calculated on the basis of Grade 5 enrolment, minus repeaters in
Grade 5, as a percentage of the 11-year-old child population age group.
http://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/censusinfodashboard/index.html.

(l) UNICEF helped the National Disaster Management Authority to develop
policy documents such as the Post Disaster Reconstruction Guidelines, and the
National Norms and Standards that set guidelines for services li ke medical coverage
and psychosocial care in relief camps.
Lessons learned
14. An evaluation of the five key strategies of the 2008 -2012 country programme
(knowledge management, capacity development, partnership, integrated district
approach and social inclusion) found UNICEF strengths to be in introducing and
supporting pilot programmes, scaling up innovations, and strengthening government
capacity to identify gaps and improve implementation. A need was found for clearer
guidelines on managing and scaling up pilot programmes, including evaluation. A
gender review conducted in 2010 concluded that ongoing interventions in girls ’
education, water and sanitation, child development and nutrition, anaemia, child
protection, and the strategy on social inclusion are well designed and well
positioned to advance children’s and women’s rights. A study undertaken in 2011,
Understanding the Perceptions of UNICEF’s Partners in India, found the UNICEF
key strengths to be in convening different partners around children ’s rights and
leveraging close working relationships with the Government by providing global
knowledge and technical assistance.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Reproductive and child health

19 000

103 000

122 000

Child development and nutrition

19 000

72 000

91 000

Water, sanitation and hygiene

12 000

65 000

77 000

Education

20 000

64 000

84 000

Child protection

13 000

51 000

64 000

Policy, planning and evaluation

25 000

38 000

63 000

6 000

6 000

12 000

15 000

12 000

27 000

16 000

100 000

116 000

10 000

16 500

26 500

55 000

12 500

67 500

210 000

540 000

750 000

Disaster risk reduction
Advocacy and communication
Communication for development
Programme review and monitoring
Cross-sectoral
Total
a
b

b

a

Covers activities under the Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, in line with the
UNICEF Evaluation Policy.
Covers operational costs (for example, communications, information technology equipment
and infrastructure, rental, salaries, security, travel).

7

Preparation process
15. The country programme was prepared in close consultation with the Ministry
of Women and Child Development. A road map was developed to ensure that the
process was closely dovetailed with the preparation of the UNDAF and the
Government’s 12th Five Year Plan Approach Paper. Guided by a multi -dimensional
problem analysis, four drivers of inequity (societal factors, services and syst ems,
economic factors, political and ideological factors) and three lenses (social inclusion
and gender, urbanization and poverty) through which the programme was
conceptualized. This was done in close consultation with government counterparts
at national and state level, civil society partners and selected donors. An initial
screening of the country programme did not foresee any environmental impact as a
result of the interventions.
Programme components, results and strategies
16. The overall goal of the 2013-2017 country programme is to advance the rights
of children, adolescents and women to survival, growth, development, participation
and protection by reducing inequities based on caste, ethnicity, gender, poverty,
region or religion.
17. A life-cycle approach with a strong equity lens and intersectoral convergence
lies at the core of the four programme component results:
(a) Infants, young children and their mothers have equitable access to, and
utilize, quality services for child survival, growt h and development;
(b) Boys and girls live in a protective and learning environment and have
equitable access to, and utilize, quality education and protection services;
(c) Adolescents participate in and are empowered to make informed
decisions affecting their lives;
(d) Policies, practices, programmes, public opinion and social norms
advance the rights of children, adolescents and women.
18. These programme component results will be coordinated through matrix
management, as several programmes contribute to one or more results. Effective
programme delivery will be ensured through efficient operations and management.
19. With adequate resources, a policy framework and large -scale national flagship
programmes in place, the need is to enhance their effecti ve implementation in a way
that ends the inter-generational cycle of deprivation among the poorest and most
marginalized. It is here that UNICEF aims to play a catalytic role in its support to
government, by adopting a strong rights-based approach and using a combination of
strategies:
(a) Developing capacities at the individual, institutional and policy levels to
improve the quality and reach of services. This includes identifying gaps, improving
data analysis and monitoring and developing skills of government functionaries;
(b) Promoting decentralization and improved governance for children ’s
rights in selected districts in rural and urban areas. The focus will be on piloting
model interventions and leveraging government resources to take them to scale. The
capacities of Panchayati Raj institutions and urban local bodies will be built to

8

develop, monitor and implement integrated plans so that the entitlements of all
children are met;
(c) Leveraging partnerships both within and outside the Government.
UNICEF will continue to work closely with the Government at the national, state
and district levels, and will complement this by convening partners from civil
society, academia, media and the private sector;
(d) Promoting social inclusion to achieve equity. Ensure that services reach
disadvantaged groups, involve and empower them by creating opportunities for
voice and choice, and advocate for transparent, accountable services and efficient
delivery;
(e) Improving knowledge management systems, sharing lessons learned
(globally, across the region and within the country) and supporting concurrent
monitoring systems to influence policy and programme management;
20. These strategies will be applied across 13 states 29 as per the existing
programme as well as to facilitate cross learning initiatives and select programming
in states 30 as per government agreement.
Programme components
21. To ensure that infants, young children and mothers have equitable access
to, and use quality services for child survival, growth and development, the
following UNICEF programmes will provide a continuum of care through the
provision of evidence-based, high-impact interventions, with emphasis on universal
coverage and quality services.
22. The reproductive and child health programme will support the delivery and
use of quality services at the community and facility levels, through strengthening
the capacities of front-line functionaries within National Rural Health Mission and
the Reproductive and Child Health programme. The focus will be on ensuring
antenatal, perinatal and post-natal services for mothers, their newborns and children
through easily accessible community, outreach and facility- based services.
Integrated management of the most critical newborn and childhood illnesse s will be
promoted.
23. The programme will aim to increase the proportion of fully immunized
children from 61 per cent to 80 per cent. Another objective is to achieve the
elimination of new HIV infections among children and to keep their mothers alive.
This will be done by accelerating the integration of prevention of parent -to-child
transmission (of HIV), treatment, care and support for children living with HIV, in
maternal, child health and antenatal care programmes.
24. India is nearing the eradication of polio. UNICEF will collaborate with
partners to maintain the current gains through intense social mobilization activities
and convergent interventions, including routine immunization, nutrition, and water,
sanitation and hygiene, through the use of community mobilizers in polio-endemic
states.
__________________
29

30

Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.
Haryana, India-administered Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab and the UNDAF
states in the north-east.

9

25. The child development and nutrition programme will support government
and partners in scaling up programmes that provide essential early childhood care
and nutrition services. It will promote key feeding and care practices for infants,
children and their mothers. The programme will support national policies and
programmes and ICDS restructuring to improve early child nutrition, growth and
development outcomes, with emphasis on the protection, promotion and suppo rt of
optimal breastfeeding; complementary feeding; hygiene and early child care and
development practices; micronutrient nutrition and anaemia prevention services;
nutrition for women during adolescence, pregnancy and lactation; and care for
severely undernourished children.
26. The programme will also aim to increase exclusive and timely initiation of
breastfeeding by 25 percentage points, the timely initiation of complementary
feeding by 20 percentage points, and full vitamin A supplementation coverage by 15
percentage points.
27. The water, sanitation and hygiene programme is critical, as water-borne
diseases contribute to high rates of child mortality, morbidity and stunting. UNICEF
will build the capacity of government and stakeholders to increase bot h the demand
for sanitation, safe water and hygiene services, and improve the quality of these
services in communities, pre-schools, anganwadis (child care centres) and health
centres.
28. The objective is to increase the sustained use of improved sanitat ion facilities
from 34 per cent to 60 per cent and achieve universal use of improved drinking
water sources at the household level. Long-term communication strategies for social
behaviour change will be crucial to stop the practice of open defecation.
29. UNICEF will aim to ensure that boys and girls live in a protective and
learning environment with equitable access to, and utilization of quality
education and protection services. Support to the design of child resource centres
will aim to improve child development, education, protection and participation.
Existing legislation and programmes notwithstanding, the challenge lies in
implementation, enforcement and major data gaps on child rights violations.
30. The education programme will help to strengthen government efforts to
provide quality education by reducing gender and other social disparities. While
retaining a focus on elementary education under the Right to Education Act, the
programme will look at a wider gamut — starting from early childhood education,
through elementary grades to grade 10. Child-friendly schools and systems will be
promoted and capacities of teachers strengthened to ensure effective teaching and
learning. Convergence with other programmes to combat child labour and child
marriage, and universal access to improved water, sanitation and hygiene facilities
in schools, will be crucial. The aim is to increase school completion rates and reduce
dropout rates.
31. The objective of the child protection programme is to ensure that boys and
girls grow up free from violence, exploitation, abuse and unnecessary separation
from their families. Emphasis will be on strengthening the child protection systems
through the roll out of the ICPS, and improve data quality and monitoring systems.
Awareness of ICPS and the capacities of functionaries, the judiciary, the legislature,
civil society and the media will be enhanced to recognize, prevent and redress rights
violations.

10

32. The programme will focus on preventing practices such as gender -biased sex
selection, child labour, child trafficking and violence against children in all settings:
at home, in schools, in institutions and in areas affected by violence. To avoid
separation of children from their families, family-based forms of alternative care
will be promoted and the use of institutional care rationalized. An in -depth
understanding of social norms and practices will be key, as will the generation of
data.
33. Nearly a quarter of India’s 1.2 billion people are adolescents. To capitalize on
this demographic dividend, focused investments and efforts targeted at this age
group are required. In recognition of this, UNICEF is giving priority to the
empowerment and participation of adolescents, especially girls. All programmes
will converge on and contribute to this priority, and interventions will focus on
adolescents and relevant key influencers and decision makers. The objective is to
empower adolescents with the correct knowledge to adopt positive practices, access
preventive, curative and protective services, and enhance their skills and
participation in local governance and decision-making.
34. UNICEF will support the Ministry of Women and Child Development in the
development and implementation of a national strategy to prevent child marriage.
35. It will be essential to have an understanding of social norms that often shape
practices that determine maternal and child health, nutrition, development, open
defecation, child marriage and corporal punishment. Awareness on how and where
to access services on sexual and reproductive health, menstrual hygiene, improved
nutrition security, HIV prevention and other care seeking behaviours will be built,
with emphasis on these being non-discriminatory and equally accessible. Strategies
will be designed to equip boys and girls with life skills, improve transition to lower secondary education, and create platforms and networks for, and of, adolescents to
give them a voice.
36. Government of India’s 12th Five Year Plan Approach Paper calls for particular
attention to the needs of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other minority
groups in order to achieve “faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth.” Towards
this end, the Government of India-UNICEF country programme of cooperation will
contribute to informing policies, practices, programmes, public opinion and
social norms to advance the rights of children, adolescents and women.
37. The policy, planning and evaluation programme will help to build a
knowledge base and ensure that disaggregated data is available on outcomes for
children and women. Government efforts to strengthen monitoring systems and
evaluation capacity will be supported, and knowledge management systems will
facilitate sharing of evidence that can add value to planning, implementation and
monitoring of flagship programmes.
38. UNICEF will advocate for the adoption of a universal, minimum guaranteed
set of social protection benefits for the most vulnerable groups, which will have a
strong bearing on child well-being. As a custodian of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, UNICEF will support the Government to translate international
commitments into national policies and laws and ensure that these are informed by
civil society voices.
39. To facilitate an enabling environment, the advocacy and communication
programme will focus on strategic partnerships and networks with government, key

11

influencers and decision makers. This includes elected representatives, faith -based
leaders, celebrities, the judiciary, media, civil society organizati ons and young
people. The aim is to inform and sustain an active and productive public discourse
on key child rights issues through the creation of tools, channels and platforms for
awareness-raising, dialogue and engagement, including traditional and soci al media.
40. The well-being of children is as dependent on the coverage and reach of
quality services, as it is on the knowledge, attitudes and behavioural practices of
mothers, fathers and caregivers. These in turn are often influenced by prevailing
social norms. The communication for development programme will test models
and develop strategies to influence social norms that promote individual behaviours
and community practices conducive to child well-being and rights realization. This
will also be used to inform government’s communication strategies and
programmes.
41. The disaster risk reduction programme will support the development of a
child-centred disaster risk reduction policy and mainstream it into development
planning and programmes. Capacities of state and national disaster management
authorities, civil society organizations and rural and urban communities will be
strengthened to respond to disasters and mitigate the impact of climate change.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
42. The country programme goals and results are aligned to the 12th Five Year
Plan Approach Paper, Ministry of Women and Child Development ’s Five Year
Strategic Plan and the 2013-2017 UNDAF. Priority issues were identified on the
basis of the United Nations Common Country Assessment, the Situation of Children
in India: A Profile, 31 and Government of India’s 12th Five Year Plan Approach
Paper. The UNDAF captures the complete range of the United Nations work in the
country and focuses on joint inter-agency programming. UNICEF will work closely
with all United Nations agencies, including WHO, United Nations Development
Programme, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the Office of the United Nations Resident
Coordinator.
Relationship to international priorities
43. The design of the country programme has been guided by the Millennium
Development Goals, the Millennium Declaration, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, A World Fit for Children and other international commitments, including
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The country programme will
contribute to results in all focus areas of the UNICEF medium -term strategic plan.
In line with the organizational priorities and normative principles enshrined in
human rights instruments, the country programme will adopt an equity -focused and
inclusive approach as a means to achieve the Millennium Development Goals for
children.

__________________
31

12

http://www.unicef.org/india/The_Situation_of_Children_in_India_-__A_profile_20110630_.pdf.

Major partnerships
44. UNICEF will engage with a wide range of partners to leverage mutual
strengths and resources. To strengthen the delivery and reach of services, UNICEF
will work with the Ministry of Women and Child Development (the nodal Ministry)
in partnership with line Ministries, departments and other government bodies.
Engagement with non-governmental and community-based organizations will be
forged to create demand for and monitor the quality of services, with equity.
Partnerships with United Nations agencies, corporate sector, academia and media
will focus on raising the profile of children’s issues. Resources will be sought from
national and multinational corporations and individuals in accordance with
applicable rules and regulations.
45. Relations will be sustained with international donors such as IKEA, United
Kingdom Department for International Development, Norway-India Partnership
Initiative, international foundations and National Committees for UNICEF.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
46. UNICEF will work with the Government to ensure the availability, analysis
and use of disaggregated data at national, state and district l evels to inform
programme design, implementation and monitoring. The results framework will help
monitor contributions to specific UNICEF Strategic Result Areas. The integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan, linked to the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation
framework, will monitor results and outcomes. A strong focus will be on equity,
gender and ensuring that evaluations are built into programme design.
47. The Ministry of Women and Child Development will coordinate the country
programme of cooperation, and all annual and mid-year reviews will be carried out
in collaboration with the Government and partners.

13

