Indonesia
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Indonesia
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.27) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 second regular session
(7-9 September 2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 February 2011.

Basic data†
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

74.5

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

41

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2007)

18

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2007)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)

230 a
86/84 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%)

83

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

80

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

52

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2007)

0.2
4c

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2001)
GNI per capita (US$)

2 010

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

77

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

83

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 420 per 100,000 live births.
b
Survey data.
c
Indicates data different from standard definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The Republic of Indonesia, a nation comprising an archipelago of about
17,000 islands, has considerable ethnic, religious and linguistic diversity and an
overall high degree of pluralism, tolerance and stability. It is not only the world’s
fourth most populous nation but also the country with the largest Muslim
population. Its population (232 million) 1 increases by approximately 3 million each
year, with a total fertility rate of 2.4 and life expectancy at birth of 69 years,
creating a demographic window of opportunity for Indonesia to invest in youth.
2.
Indonesia submitted its second periodic report to the Committee on the Rights
of the Child in February 2002, followed by a supplementary report in March 2004.
Many of the concluding observations on the second report have been addressed,
while the combined third and fourth periodic report, which was due in October
2007, has yet to be submitted.
3.
Since 1998, Indonesia has undergone major political and socio -economic
transformations, emerging as a vibrant democracy with a decentralized Government
and greater social openness and debate. Indonesia is already one of the most
decentralized countries in the world, with almost 500 provincial, district and city
governments being the decision makers for the majority of all governmental matters.
According to the World Bank 2007 Indonesia Public Expenditure Review, nearly
40 per cent of public spending is undertaken at the local level; this represents a level
__________________
1

2

Indonesian population projection 2009.

of fiscal decentralization higher than the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development average.
4.
Between 2004 and 2008, Indonesia consolidated democratic institutions and
returned to political and macroeconomic stability. The country has largely recovered
from the 1998 economic crisis, when millions of its citizens were in poverty and
Indonesia regressed to low-income status. Indonesia is once again one of the world’s
emergent middle-income countries, with a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of
$2,271 in 2008. 2 Since 2002, Indonesia’s real GDP has grown at 5 per cent to 6 per
cent annually, and the country succeeded in maintaining a 4.5 per cent growth rate
in 2009, making it the third best performing economy in the world, despite the
global financial crisis. Indonesia has kept inflation under control and has a strong
balance of payment. These achievements can be credited to prudent fiscal
management and sound macro-economic and trade/investment policies as well as a
strong local market.
5.
However, Indonesia is struggling to translate the opportunities from its
political and socio-economic transformation into sustainable human development,
particularly for children. Inequalities are rising (Gini index 39.4 3) and while poverty
levels decreased, from 23 per cent in 1997-1998 to 14.2 per cent in 2009, more than
40 million people live on $2 or below per day, a figure nearly equal to the total in all
of the rest of East Asia, excluding China. 4 Many Indonesian households cluster
around the $1.55 per day national poverty line and numerous non -poor are
vulnerable to poverty in the face of various shocks.
6.
Despite good progress in many sectors, there are still a number of child-related
indicators in which Indonesia is seriously lagging behind and where special
attention is required.
7.
The maternal mortality rate of Indonesia has improved slowly, from 334 per
100,000 live births in 1997 to 230 per 100,000 live births in 2007 — currently three
times that of Viet Nam and six times that of China or Malaysia. The 2007 Indonesia
Demographic Health Survey reports skilled health personnel attend only 72 per cent
of births. While infant mortality decreased (from 68 per 1,000 live births in 1991 to
34 per 1,000 live births in 2009) and under-five mortality declined (from 79 per
1,000 live births in 1991 to 44 per 1,000 live births in 2009), malnutrition rates are
high: 28.7 per cent of children below the age of five are underweight. Stunting rates
have increased in recent years despite reductions in poverty. Though more
accessible, health care quality is unreliable; inefficiency results in significant out -ofpocket spending and increased inequities.
8.
Despite good progress towards universal primary education (97 per cent in
2009 compared to 94 per cent in 2004), achieving gender parity in enrolment rates
in primary and secondary schools, and improvements in learning achievements
recorded in the 2003 and 2006 Programme for International Students assessments,
transition rates from primary to secondary school are still low (79 per cent). Only
55 per cent of children from low-income quintiles are enrolled in junior secondary
__________________
2
3

4

Based on World Bank threshold for country classification.
A low Gini coefficient indicates a more equal distribution, with 0 corresponding to complete
equality, while higher Gini coefficients indicate more unequal distribution, with 1 corresponding
to complete inequality.
Indonesia Public Expenditure Review, World Bank, 2007.

schools. For primary and junior secondary levels, just 55 per cent and 73 per cent of
teachers, respectively, possess minimum qualifications required by the Ministry of
National Education. 5 In addition, although approximately 70 per cent of education
expenditure is at the subnational level, it is mostly non-discretionary routine
spending, with the majority of the development budget still spent by the central
Government.
9.
Only 36 per cent of rural areas have access to sanitation. An estimated
70 million people still defecate in open spaces, and access to water supply remains a
challenge for the poorest. Eighty per cent of the rural poor and 59 per cent of the
urban poor do not have access to septic tanks, and less than 1 per cent of all
Indonesians have access to piped sewage services, the lowest percentage in the
region and among comparable countries. There is low public awareness of the
adverse impacts of inadequate sanitation systems or the potentially huge benefits of
improving them. Indonesian policy dictates that basic sanitatio n is the responsibility
of private households, even though the national health and environmental costs of
inadequate sanitation are substantial, especially in cities.
10. The country continues to face child protection challenges. Violence is found in
schools, on the streets, in the workplace and in institutions, such as orphanages and
detention centres. A recent UNICEF-supported study on the quality of care in child
care institutions, conducted by Save the Children and the Ministry of Social Affairs,
indicates that an estimated 5 million children live in 7,000 childcare institutions,
even though 94 per cent of them have one or both surviving parents and extended
family members. Girls under 18 comprise one third of women trafficked for sex
work, a result of lack of policy and low public awareness around issues such as birth
registration, justice for children, abuse, neglect, trafficking, child labour and
children living and working on the streets. In 2007, a gender study carried out by
UNICEF in Papua showed that cases of violence against girls and women are
generally not reported to the police. Law 23/2004 on domestic violence, effective
since 2005, is neither known by the rural population nor enforced by the justice
system. This is largely because provincial and district regulations on how to respond
to domestic violence have not yet been passed.
11. Increasing new HIV infections in Indonesia make the epidemic one of the
fastest growing in Asia, although the aggregate national prevalence is as low as
0.2 per cent. At the end of 2009, about 333,200 people were estimated to be living
with HIV, 25 per cent of them women. 6 Data indicates that every year 3,000 to
5,000 people die of AIDS in Indonesia — almost 10 people per day. Most of these
deaths are preventable through earlier diagnosis and timely treatment. In 2008,
HIV/AIDS affected an estimated 200,000 children across Indonesia, with seven new
HIV infections among children every day. Although the epidemic in Indonesia is
concentrated among high-risk populations, it has become a generalized epidemic in
Papua and West Papua provinces. A province-wide, population-based survey
conducted in 2006 estimates adult HIV prevalence at 2.4 per cent, reaching 3.2 per
cent in the remote highlands and 2.9 per cent in less-accessible lowland areas.
Among 15 to 24-year-olds, HIV prevalence was 3 per cent. 7
__________________
5
6

7

4

Investing in Indonesia’s Education, World Bank, 2007.
Country report on the follow up to the declaration of commitment on HIV/AIDS (UNGASS),
2008-2009, National AIDS Commission, Republic of Indonesia, 2009.
Ministry of Health Indonesia and Central Bureau Statistic, 2007.

12. Considerable disparities exist for most child-related indicators across and
within provinces. The poverty rate is 15.7 per cent in Java/Bali and 38.7 per cent in
more remote Papua. Although poverty incidence is higher in eastern Indonesia and
remote areas, most of Indonesia’s poor live in the densely populated western regions
of the archipelago. For example, while the poverty incidence in Java/Bali is
relatively low, the island is home to 57 per cent of Indonesia’s total poor, compared
to Papua, with only 3 per cent. In Java, the average distance of a household to the
nearest public health clinic is 4 kilometres, compared to 32 kilometres in Papua. The
infant mortality rate (IMR) in the Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT) Province is 80 per
1,000 live births, four times the IMR in Bali. Disparities across socio -economic
groups show under-five mortality rates as high as 77 per 1,000 live births among the
poorest households, compared with 22 per 1,000 live births among wealthiest
households. Some 66 per cent of the poorest quintile in Java/Bali has access to
improved water, compared to 35 per cent in Kalimantan and 9 per cent in Papua.
About 50 per cent of rural poor have access to an improved source of water,
compared with 80 per cent of urban poor.
13. Climate change has been acknowledged as a major threat to the future of
Indonesia. Indonesia is the world’s third largest greenhouse gas emitter, with 80 per
cent of its carbon footprint attributed to the degradation of peat land and the logging
of its forests. Indonesia is one of the most vulnerable countries to natural disasters.
As a result of climate change, natural disasters are likely to get worse. Mudslides
and floods occur yearly in Indonesia. Sitting along an active tectonic plate, the
country is prone to high levels of seismic activity. The massive December 2004
earthquake and tsunami devastated large parts of the country’s Aceh province in
Northern Sumatra, leaving around 200,000 Indonesians dead or missing and
hundreds of thousands without a home. Emergency response represents a consistent
draw on national financial resources.
14. Indonesia’s main constraint to addressing the remaining challenges faced by
children is not a lack of financial resources. World Bank sectoral expenditure reviews
show that inadequate local technical and administrative capacity hinders translating
available resources into better development outcomes for children. For instance, while
the National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM-Mandiri) and other social
protection schemes — such as Operational Aid for Schools Programme (BOS), School
Health Programme (UKS), Rice for the Poor Programme (RASKIN) and the Social
Safety Net on Health (Jamkesmas/Jamkesda) — focus on poverty and disparity
reduction with national and subnational governments accessing considerable resources,
inadequate evidence-based planning, budgetary allocations and absorption capacity
affect the realization of the rights of the most vulnerable and socially excluded.
15. The transfer of greater political and administrative authority to district
governments has brought governance closer to the people, along with resources to
carry out new functions. However, each local government has its own p rerogatives,
affecting legal and policy enforcement as well as decision-making processes and
upscaling and replicating of programmes. Commitment at the national level does not
necessarily translate to the subnational level, where there are also problems of
capacity, including absorption of nationally allocated resources.
16. The 2010 to 2014 National Medium-Term Development Strategy (RPJM)
shows the Government’s increasing commitment to address socio -economic
development and institutional challenges, providing opportunities to development

partners to support this phase of transformation and second generation reforms.
Failure to address these reforms will create a middle-income trap, with stagnant
poverty levels, persisting disparities, depleted natural resou rces and rising threats to
social cohesion.
17. The continued transformation of Indonesia depends on tackling organizational
and institutional issues. For UNICEF, supporting those changes means shifting from
a project-oriented approach to a systemic approach, offering targeted technical
assistance to local and national institutions to develop capacity for evidence -based
planning and resource allocation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation
for programmes that address child disparity and poverty and provide quality social
services to vulnerable and disadvantaged populations.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2010
Key results achieved
18. Under the child protection programme, UNICEF helped develop the 2007 Law
on Human Trafficking and the adoption of 33 subnational laws on child protection.
The same programme provided support to (a) revise the Juvenile Justice Law;
(b) finalize the National Plan of Action on elimination of violence; and (c) adopt
Law 23 on Population Administration and universal and free birth registration in
2006 as well as the strategic Universal Birth Registration Plan by 2011.
19. In 2007, Indonesia adopted Law 24 on Disaster Management, providing
urgently needed framework for a coordinated approach to emergency preparedness
and response. While capacity to implement the new law remains uneven across the
provinces, the framework has already proven effective in the two most recent
earthquakes in West Java and North Sumatra in September and Octobe r 2009,
respectively.
20. In February 2008, with support from UNICEF, the World Health Organization
and other development partners, Indonesia was declared polio free. Efforts continue
to control malaria in 11 districts in Eastern Indonesia, eliminate mater nal and
neonatal tetanus by 2011 and revitalize the routine immunization system, including
in tsunami-affected areas.
21. In 28 supported districts, the Improving Maternal Health in Indonesia model —
funded by the Australian Agency for International Development and the United
Kingdom Department for International Development — to support the Making
Pregnancy Safer Government strategy resulted in skilled health personnel attending
15 per cent more births, while more than 90 per cent of hospitals increased cap acity to
respond effectively to emergency obstetric and neonatal complications.
22. Between 2008 and 2010, the water and environmental sanitation programme,
with support from the Government of the Netherlands, has contributed to the
development of improved water supply facilities in 147 villages and improved
hygiene and sanitation in 211 villages and 240 schools in 25 districts and
6 provinces of Eastern Indonesia. In addition, the programme has contributed to the
improvement of water, sanitation and hygiene in five urban slum areas.

6

23. The rights of children, young people and women affected and infected by HIV
have received needed attention in the national HIV agenda, which led to the
development of a funded national strategy. With funding from the Netherl ands, the
strategic plan for education now includes HIV education in the high -HIV-prevalence
province of Papua, providing prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
care and support services to families affected by HIV/AIDS.
24. Primary school-age children from nearly 7,000 schools across the country
enjoy the Creating Learning Communities for Children model, which is funded by
New Zealand Aid and currently being replicated in 86 districts. Mainstreaming
Good Practices in Basic Education, a project funded by the European Union, aims at
addressing capacity gaps in planning, monitoring, budgeting and supervision and is
being implemented in an additional 2,600 schools from 12 districts.
25. The Canadian International Development Agency funded capacity
development for 9 provinces and 23 districts in evidence-based planning and
budgeting with the Monitoring Millennium Development Goals at a local -level
model as well as a District Situation Analysis on Children and Women using the
human rights-based approach to programming. This increased capacity and the
strengthened partnerships around pro-child social policies, planning and budgeting
led to stronger Government commitments as reflected in the RPJM 2010 to 2014.
26. During the Indian Ocean tsunami response, 159 integrated health services units
(posyandu) and 300 earthquake-resistant schools were constructed with direct
UNICEF support and funding from multiple donors. In addition, 8,556 teachers and
principals were trained with improved teaching and learning techniques to address
workforce capacity gaps following the disaster. No outbreak of disease was recorded
and no child was trafficked; 2,562 children were placed in immediate family,
communities or extended family. In addition, 14,200 children attended 21 c hildren’s
centres across Aceh and Nias that provided integrated child protection services,
including psychosocial and legal assistance.
Lessons learned
27. Since 2005, UNICEF has redefined its role and strategies toward s more
sustainable development in Indonesia’s evolving context, leading to coverage of
more programme areas. The 2008 midterm review (MTR) of the country programme
for 2006 to 2010 conducted by UNICEF and the Government and the 2009 Strategic
Moment of Reflection recommended implementing a strategic shift upstream to
remain a relevant development partner in a middle-income country context. The
following lessons were identified to support that shift:
(a) Strengthen upstreaming in all UNICEF work. UNICEF should
increasingly engage in evidence-informed advocacy at national and subnational
levels — to ensure the rights of the most vulnerable children are addressed in policy
formulation and budget allocation in all sectors — and develop collaborative
relationships and partnerships to increase the dialogue on children’s rights.
(b) Leverage models for policy formulation. The MTR recognized that
models and pilots were not strategically used, had weak linkages with policy, and
were spread over 16 provinces and 100 districts without clear ex ante defined
expectations and exit strategies. This overstretched UNICEF capacity to provide
support to strengthen systems at the subnational level.

(c) Strategic targeting is critical to address disparities and fulfil the rights of
vulnerable children and women. For UNICEF, this entails strengthening government
capacity, particularly at the subnational level, to ensure available resources are
translated into outcomes for the most vulnerable.
(d) Decentralization can work for children. The political transformat ion in
Indonesia calls for greater attention to the dynamic between central and subnational
governments. UNICEF will move from project-based service delivery to capacity
development of subnational authorities in evidence-based planning and budgeting,
management and monitoring of quality social services.
(e) Communication for development should be used strategically for
sustainable achievements across programmes. Communication for development has
been mainstreamed into programme components to address specif ic social
behaviours preventing children from fully enjoying their rights. However, the 2008
MTR calls for an overall strategy on communication for development so it can
influence power relationships including those related to gender, by enabling right
holders to engage duty bearers in dialogue, developing their capacity to become
agents of change rather than targets of service delivery.

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources*

Total

Policy advocacy and partnerships for children

7 700

14 000**

21 700

Child survival and development

5 600

75 500

81 100

Education and adolescent development

4 800

17 500

22 300

Child protection

3 900

10 000

13 900

Cross-sectoral costs

5 700

10 500

16 200

27 700

127 500

155 200

Programme

Total

* Indicative estimates based on the availability of future funding opportunities, donor
contributions, private sectors and thematic funds. Estimate excludes emergency funding.
** Includes fund-raising expenses charged to other resources.

Preparation process
28. The country programme exercise was carried out with guidance from the
National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas). The 2008 MTR and the
Strategic Moment of Reflection in October 2009 were critical processes to define
the country programme framework and strategies.
Programme components results and strategies
29. The programme supports the Government in realizing the rights of children,
paying particular attention to addressing vulnerabilities and reducing disparities.

8

Specific programme results are detailed under each programme component below.
Using a human rights-based approach to programming, overall strategies to achieve
those results include (a) evidence-based advocacy to formulate child-friendly
policies that reduce disparities and for public social spending in partnership with
academic and research centres; (b) capacity development for relevant institutions to
offer basic quality services and for individuals to access them; and (c) strengthened
Government capacity for disaster risk reduction and response.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
30. The country programme will contribute to the Government’s priorities as
stated in the National Plan of Action for Children and Women and the Government’s
RPJM 2010 to 2014, aiming for a developed and inclusive Indonesia that ensures a
sustainable and high quality of life for its entire population. It also builds on the
Jakarta Commitment of 12 January 2009, aiming to strengthen Government
ownership of development programmes while ensuring a coordinated approach
among its development partners.
31. The programme is synchronized with the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2011-2015, to ensure greater United Nations coherence.
Programme components contribute directly to the three UNDAF focus areas:
(a) enhancing equity; (b) promoting effective participation; and (c) strengthening
national and local resilience.
Relationship to international priorities
32. The country programme, guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
the Concluding Observations on Indonesia’s report to the Committee on the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, supports the principles of A World Fit for
Children and the Millennium Declaration and Development Goals. The programme
contributes to the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) 2006-2013.
Programme components
33. Policy advocacy and partnerships for children. This programme component
supports the Government’s RPJM to advance the well-being and rights of children
and women. Support will be given to all other programme components, with a focus
on social policy, budgeting, social protection, evidence-based advocacy, knowledge
management, communications for development, media relations and private -sector
fundraising and partnerships.
34. To ensure effective advocacy, the programme will expand and strengthen
UNICEF partnerships with the Government, non-governmental organizations, faithbased organizations, United Nations agencies, international financing institutions,
the media, academia and the private sector. These efforts spotlight children in public
dialogue and decisions in the context of Indonesia’s policy and fiscal space.
Anticipated programme component results by 2015 are the following: (a) child
disparity across all sectors reduced through evidence-based planning, policy and
resource allocation at the national level and in five MTSP focus provinces;
(b) increased prioritization of children and women’s rights in policies, programmes
and resources strengthened as a result of strategic partnerships and improved

knowledge management; and (c) children and young peo ple express themselves to
influence policies and practices affecting their lives.
35. Child survival and development programme. This component will provide
strategic support to address persistent disparities in health and nutrition outcomes,
systemic obstacles in the health sector and limited understanding of the scope of the
epidemiological transition.
36. Cooperation include a number of areas: (a) providing technical assistance to
improve policies, access to and uptake of health services for poor and vuln erable
children and women; (b) developing capacity in health and human resources,
particularly in remote, poor areas; and (c) improving health information systems,
monitoring and evaluation; documenting lessons learned to improve governance,
services and resource allocation.
37. UNICEF will support policy-related analysis, research and piloting new
approaches. Aceh, NTT, and Papua provinces will receive priority as per the
UNDAF; other districts and provinces with specific epidemiological or equity issues
will be considered for modelling. Partners will include the Ministry of Health, the
Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, Bappenas, relevant United
Nations agencies, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
academia, professional organizations and civil society.
38. The following programme component results are expected by 2015:
(a) children and women benefit from improved access to, and delivery of, quality
basic services, such as nutrition, water, sanitation, hygiene and prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV, including in emergencies; and (b) families and
communities sustain positive behaviours resulting in improved health for children
and women.
39. Education and adolescent development. This component will use evidencebased data analysis to advocate for policies to improve education systems, laws and
regulations, and sector-wide programming to increase enrolment, participation,
learning and completing primary and secondary education, including during
emergencies.
40. Major partners include Bappenas, Ministry of National Education, Ministry of
Religious Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Youth
and Sports, the National Family Planning Coordination Board, the National Disaster
Management Agency, government offices at provincial and district levels, and
national and provincial AIDS commissions. Stronger partnerships will be developed
with Indonesian universities and research institutions at national and subnational
levels, international and multilateral organizations, including with relevant United
Nations agencies, civil society organizations and the media.
41. The following programme component results are expected by 2015: (a) children
and young people, especially vulnerable populations, are equipped with adequate
knowledge, basic education and life skills to cope with challenges and opportunities;
(b) improved government and community-based organization capacities at national and
subnational levels for implementing holistic early childhood development;
(c) strengthened legislation and increased budget allocations for achieving school
readiness for children below the age of seven; and (d) improved education-sector
preparedness plans and strengthened capacities of government and civil society
organizations to respond to disasters and emergencies.

10

42. Child protection programme. This component emphasizes comprehensive child
protection systems at national and subnational levels. Priorities include (a) strengthened
service delivery systems at the national and subnational levels; (b) promoting familybased care; (c) developing a child-sensitive justice system; and (d) promoting restorative
justice for child offenders. The programme will continue to assist the Government in
universal birth registration.
43. A child protection information management system will collect routine data to
strengthen national and subnational analysis of key child protection indicators in
order to inform policy, planning and budget allocations. The programme will
collaborate with universities to strengthen research capacities regarding child
protection issues.
44. The following programme component results are expected by 2015: (a) a
comprehensive and community-based child protection system (social welfare, police,
and justice) in five MTSP focus provinces; (b) monitoring data collection systems on
child protection for policy, planning and budgeting purposes; and (c) children protected
from immediate and long-term impact of conflicts and natural disasters.
45. Cross-sectoral costs. Costs cover coordination and management of the
country programme in the country and zone offices, including supply and logistics,
communication, planning, monitoring and evaluation.
Major partnerships
46. Working through the UNDAF, the country programme will cooperate with the
World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) in maternal and child health; the World Food Programme in nutrition; the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (U NESCO) in
education; the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, UNESCO, UNFPA
and WHO in combating HIV/AIDS; the International Labour Organization in
combating child labour; and with the World Bank to address child poverty and
disparities. UNICEF will strengthen partnerships with the private sector in
Indonesia and with National Committees for UNICEF in several countries, and
continue partnerships with the Australian Government’s Overseas Aid Program
(AusAID), the European Commission, the Netherlands, the New Zealand Agency for
International Development, Norway, and the United States Agency for International
Development.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
47. The five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (IMEP) will examine
monitoring and evaluation activities. UNICEF will conduct in-depth studies on
(a) the impact of climate change on children; (b) the impact of migration on
children; and (c) the needs of adolescents and youth.
48. UNICEF will pursue a more strategic approach to evaluation. This includes
(a) managing rather than implementing the evaluation function; (b) coordinating
evaluation in line with the Paris Declaration and the Jakarta Commitment following
the successful integrated monitoring and evaluation approach sup ported by
UNICEF, AusAID, the United Kingdom Department for International Development
and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation; (c) engaging the Government to

evaluate key supported programmes; and (d) building strategic partnerships by
supporting the Indonesian Evaluation Association.
49. Investments in knowledge management will support the commitment of
UNICEF to be a knowledge leader for children while meeting the demand for
evidence to replicate successful programmes.
50. UNICEF will work with the Central Statistics Bureau, Bappenas, and other
United Nations agencies, as well as with academic and research centres, on
statistics, surveys and other quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis
pertaining to children and women’s rights, such as multiple indicator cluster surveys
and knowledge, attitudes and practices studies. UNICEF will support capacity
development at national and subnational levels, to allow for a stronger and ongoing
situation analysis of children and women.
51. Country-specific results-monitoring based on the CPD results matrix will
cover both national and subnational levels through the field offices. DevInfo will be
used for data management, presentation and sharing. District -level Millennium
Development Goals monitoring and situation analysis will support evidence-based
advocacy.
52. An MTR will be held in 2013, coordinated with other United Nations agencies.
More effective and regular field and monitoring visits, with a focus on cross sectoral linkages and the development, documentation and replication of sound
models will strengthen programme coordination.
53. Bappenas will coordinate for UNICEF within the Government of Indonesia
and lead various review processes at the national and subnational levels. For the
2013 MTR, an evaluation of the subnational role of UNICEF will assess the extent
to which the new engagement of the organization at the decentralized level
contributes to the achievement of results for children. UNICEF will endeavour to
prioritize mainstreaming gender in all activities.

12

