Iraq
Country programme document
2011-2014

The draft country programme document for Iraq
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.13) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 annual session (1-4 June
2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

†

Basic data
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

14.4
44 1
6a

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female, 2007)

84 b 2
87/82

Survival rate to primary grade 5 (%, 2004)

70

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

77

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

76

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, children 5 to 14 years old, 2006)

..
11
c

GNI per capita (US$)
One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

62

One-year-olds immunized against measles

69

†
a
b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org/.
World Health Organization child growth standard.
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjuste d for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 300 per 100,000 live births. See
http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Lower-middle-income ($976 to $3,855).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Iraq is steadily emerging from a series of conflicts and crisis with a resolve to
improve the well-being of its children and women. Decades of conflict in Iraq have
resulted in weakened infrastructure and proportionately low investments in children.
However, with emerging systems for improved service delivery, there is ample scope
for innovation and application of a holistic approach to the wellbeing of Iraq's
children. The direct impact of these innovations will have a significant bearing on
the lives and future of more than 15 million Iraqis who are less than 18 years of age
and about 23 per cent of Iraqis are poor.
The quality and delivery of essential services that had deteriorated
significantly since 1990 are gradually being addressed. Insecurity and weake ning of
institutions following the events of especially since 2003 had constrained delivery of
basic services but are now showing signs of recovery. Greater security along with
evidence based advocacy would enable emergence of strong institutions that coul d
play a vital role in improvement in the situation of children and needed to address
the structural and capacity gaps in public sector institutions to revive basic services.
Greater decentralization of power to governorates is likely to rectify the mismat ch of
resources with staffing and maintenance of public utilities. Rebuilding the Iraqi
2.

__________________

1 Ministry of Health, GoI, reports that according their statistics U5 Mortality Rate had reduced to 35
per 1,000 live births in 2008, which further reduced to 29.5 per 1,000 live births in 2009.
2 Ministry of Health, GoI, reports that according to their statistics Maternal Mortally Rate recently
reduced by nearly 50 percent from 84 per 100,000 live births as was reported by IFHS 2006/7.

2

public sector, therefore, is a fundamental priority. The security situation has been
steadily improving since 2004, and the Government of Iraq believes that there has
been as much as 60 per cent decrease in violence, the beginning of 2010 seeing the
lowest level of violence since 2003. The improved security is also acknowledged by
the UN. 3
3.
Government of Iraq has incorporated the Millennium Development Goals in
its strategic plans and the authorities are taking necessary measures for
implementation through strengthening partnerships with the donor community, UN
agencies and Civil Society Organizations. There is a need for concerted efforts from
the Government and other duty-bearers to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, targets of A World Fit for Children and Education for All (EFA). Policy
updates would provide the necessary focus to the vulnerable groups and to remote
areas. Significant disparities exist among regions, and gender inequality that had
significantly deteriorated since 2003 is being recognised. Civil society needs
strengthening, and opportunities for nation-building must include youth and children.
Efforts towards attainment of the Millennium Development Goals and Iraqi
commitments under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women need to be
strengthened. Government has indicated that it is pursuing implementation of al l
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and providing basic health
services to children and mothers and the most vulnerable people in the far flung
areas of the country.
4.
Goal 1 (Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger) faces particular challenges,
considering the proportion of the population living under the poverty line and
widespread malnutrition among children and women. Moderate and severe stunting
is greater than 20 per cent of children under five, while just 25 per cent of infants are
exclusively breastfed. 4 The situation is exacerbated by widespread low 35.5 per cent
of reproductive-age women are anaemic, however, the situation is steadily improving
as reported by MOH. The focus in the health sector is on curative rather than
preventive treatment. The security situation and deterioration of Iraqi public sector
institutions are compounded by the „brain drain‟ of professionals. Programmes
developed to address this situation focus on symptoms rather than root causes.
5.
Primary school net enrolment has improved (87 per cent for boys, 82 per cent
for girls in 2007) but remains insufficient to realize Goal 2 (Achieve universal
primary education) and the EFA goals. Rural enrolment for girls lags at 68 per cent.
Preschool enrolment among children 3-5 years old is only 3 per cent. Nearly 9 in 10
children younger than age 15 do not attend school regularly, largely because of
negative attitudes towards girls‟ education. Many children do not progress to
secondary education. Significantly for achievement of Goal 3 (Promote gender
equality and empower women), the ratio of females to males in primary school is
94.2 per cent, dropping to 76.9 per cent at secondary level. Although more
alternatives are being offered to out-of-school children and adolescents, girls
represent barely 25 per cent of students in such programmes. High rates of women ‟s
illiteracy persist, with rates for young women nearly double those for young men.
The lack of quality schooling is exacerbated by a curriculum unable to prep are youth
__________________

3 United Nations Development Action Framework for Iraq, 2011-14
4 Ministry of Health, GoI, reports that exclusive breastfeeding rates have increased from 25 percent
(MICS3, 2006) to 42 percent in 2009.

3

for the labour market, which shows an unemployment rate of 30 per cent among
youth aged 15-24. A formal education sector policy is only now being developed.
6.
The under-five mortality rate stands at 44 per 1,000 live births, while the
maternal mortality ratio, at 84 per 100,000 live births, is double that of Iraq ‟s
neighbours 5 The situation regarding the high numbers of acute respiratory infections
and diarrhoeal diseases among children is worsened by pervasive low birth weight
and inadequate newborn care and infant/young child feeding practices. Routine
immunization services have deteriorated as violence has restricted vaccination teams
from reaching the population. In 2008, a drop in measles coverage, to less than 80
per cent in 45 out of 114 districts, contributed to more than 38,000 cases of measles
and nearly 200 deaths. Although considerable challenges remain in meeting Goal 4
(Reduce child mortality) and Goal 5 (Improve maternal health), significant progress
is still possible. Comprehensive efforts are combining national policy reform efforts
with specific area-based interventions at governorate level, focused on pockets of
acute child vulnerability and increased targeted investments in mate rnal, newborn
and child health.
7.
The Government of Iraq reports that sufficient progress on Goal 6 (Combat
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases) had been achieved by October 2009, 6
primarily relating to combating tuberculosis and malaria. Although the number of
registered HIV cases remains very low, with a prevalence rate, which is significantly
less than 1 per cent, 7 associated vulnerability factors are rising and require urgent
policy priority. Cases of cholera have also dropped substantially since 2007.
8.
Achievement of Goal 7 (Ensure environmental sustainability) relating to safe
water is off track. Iraq faces an acute water crisis, largely because of the lack of a
Constitutional and legislative framework in this area and weak delivery capacity.
Major water pipe networks leak or rupture frequently, and the resulting mix of
sewage with drinking water places large parts of the population at risk. Most sewage
is released raw into waterways, and waste collection is rare. Rural -urban disparities
are wide, and nearly half of water users and a quarter of sani tation users report
unreliable services. Sustainable resource management remains a key challenge.
9.
Iraq also faces a severely weakened protective environment. The acute risks for
children and women threaten the State‟s commitments under the Millennium
Declaration. The social protection system requires strengthening to become more
proactive and rights-based. Insufficient data constrain evidence-based planning, as
do the outmoded knowledge and skills of professionals. Gaps exist in child -friendly
and gender-sensitive protection laws, and enforcement remains poor. Although
precise data are lacking, significant numbers of children and adolescents are exposed
to extreme levels of violence, exploitation and abuse, and patterns of gender-based
violence are emerging. Investigation of crimes against women is hampered by a lack
of skills, training and awareness. The juvenile justice system does not conform to
international norms and requires urgent reform.
10. The treatment of children with disabilities represents an increasing concern
and points to an overreliance on institutionalization. The high percentage of child
__________________

5 As mentioned on page 1, GoI suggests that these figures are likely to be better now.
6 Central Organization for Statistics and Information Technology presentation to United Nations
partners, October 2009.
7
Ibid. “People living with HIV 15-49 years old, 2006”.

4

labour among children 5-14 years old, estimated at 11 per cent, violates the
commitments of Iraq under international conventions.
11. Despite some progress made, virtually all concluding observations of the
Committee on the Rights of the child, made in 1998 on the State party report, are
still outstanding. These include expressions of concern about the need for
strengthened law enforcement; insufficient coordination among entities working for
children; absence of an independent mechanism to address child rights violations;
insufficient disaggregated data, child budgetary resources and awareness of
principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child ; inadequate measures to
ensure school enrolment of girls, especially in rural areas; improper investigation of
cases of abuse and ill-treatment; poor services for children with disabilities;
pervasive child labour and the phenomenon of children who live o r work on the
street; and a juvenile justice system non-aligned to international standards.
12. On the positive side, the Government has decided to prepare a second State
party report to establish a baseline for monitoring the Convention. Iraq also ratifi ed
both Optional Protocols to the Convention in September 2007. No measures are yet
in place to implement relevant provisions. Concerns raised in many observations of
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women from 2000
likewise remain outstanding. These concerns include violence against women, high
illiteracy rates and poor overall health among women.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2010
Key results achieved
13. Building on the recommendations of the midterm review, held in 2008, the
programme has shifted its focus to address important social policy and institutional
capacity gaps through evidence-based research and analysis in the context of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (hereafter referred to as „the Conventions‟)
and the Millennium Development Goals. Simultaneously, service delivery elements
have been scaled down. UNICEF has initiated dialogue to take the lead in rebuilding
the basic education sector and has assumed an advisory role with partners on
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. This is consistent with
the National Development Plan, 2010-2014, and its predecessor the National
Development Strategy; the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF), 2011-2014; and commitments under the two Conventions and A World
Fit for Children.
14. Iraq-UNICEF collaboration has centred on five programmes: survival, growth
and early development; quality learning and development; water, environmental
sanitation and hygiene; child protection and participation; and planning, advocacy,
communication, knowledge and strategic interventions (PACKS), which adjusted the
policy, advocacy, partnerships and communication programme to better respond to
changing national contexts. All programmes have initiated stand -alone components
on strengthening national policies and systems. Child protection and PACKS
underwent substantive changes to reflect strengthened UNICEF knowledge
management and support for evidence-based advocacy.
15. At the policy level, key results have included (a) development of a framework
for a National Education Strategy and capacity development of key
Education/Higher Education Ministry staff in strategic education planning, in

5

partnership with the World Bank and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization; initiation of development of a National Water and Sanitation
Policy; and implementation of a national strategic plan for infant and young child
feeding. Other key results include (a) strengthening the knowledge base through the
launch of the IraqInfo database and completion of a Situation Analysis for Iraq;
(b) providing over 1.5 million people with improved access to safe water and
improved sanitation; (c) giving nearly 50,000 boys and girls in six governorates
access to psychosocial care at school by over 1,500 trained teachers; (d) reaching
over 90 per cent of under-five children through immunization campaigns targeting
measles, mumps and rubella and polio, and improving access to primary health care
through rehabilitation of facilities; and (e) leading the establishment of a mechanism
for monitoring and reporting on grave child rights violations, base d on Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). Assessment and response capacity in every
governorate was strengthened through partnerships with international
non-governmental organizations.
Lessons learned
16. Iraq has the attributes of a middle-income country but faces serious postconflict challenges. The continuing insecurity in the capital and flashpoints affect
children and their caregivers and constrain UNICEF operational capacities. An
important lesson highlighted in the midterm review is that op portunities for
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals across the 18 governorates vary
widely. It is increasingly clear that achievement of the Goals is possible only if
programme management is decentralized and support systems evolve, with target ed
governorate-based programming complemented by proportionate budgetary
allocations for children. It would be necessary to work with a broader array of
partners than ever before. The area-based approach — employed since 2008 — is a
useful foundation upon which to build downstream programming. Use of
Communication for Development (C4D) to change attitudes and behaviour patterns
must be further developed.
17. A shift towards upstream policy support and higher-impact capacity
development has been crucial to supporting the updating of policies and systems.
This has addressed the pressing human resource needs of Iraq and has strengthened
knowledge-focused programming through support to implementing laws, the
Conventions and action plans, and assessment of skills needed. A generic planning
role has been re-engineered under PACKS to include specific responsibilities,
including (a) overseeing the development and monitoring of the CPD, country
programme action plan and annual work plan, and (b) managing studies and
evaluations to feed into future programmes.
18. A final key management lesson involves an understanding that a sophisticated
development programme cannot be delivered remotely, as the previous programme
was from Jordan, although the previous country program me demonstrated efficiency
and speed despite volatile field conditions. With the return to Iraq in mid -2009, the
presence of senior international staff in Baghdad has proven crucial in
re-establishing UNICEF credibility at the highest levels and in leverag ing support
for programmes, even as access outside the International Zone in Baghdad is a
constraint. UNICEF must remain vigilant to the significant constraints posed by
ever-changing operational conditions. Strengthening field capacity should be
continued, building on innovative contracting and monitoring procedures that
minimize staff exposure to risk.

6

The country programme, 2011-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Quality Learning and Development

794

75 000

75 794

Survival and Growth

794

30 000

30 794

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)

873

30 000

30 873

Child Protection

555

24 000

24 555

Planning, Advocacy, Communication,
Knowledge and Strategic Interventions
(PACKS)

2 936

18 000

20 936

Cross-sectoral costs

1 984

23 000

24 984

7 936

200 000

207 936

Total

Preparation process
19. The Iraq National Development Plan and emerging national priorities have
provided guidance for the country programme, as have the Poverty Reduction
Strategy (PRS) and the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP). Sectoral
annual reviews with counterparts in November and December 2009 further assisted
in refining the design. Consultations at a January 2010 joint strategy mee ting in
Baghdad with key Government counterparts, led by the Ministry of Planning and
Development Cooperation, resulted in valuable sector-specific inputs.
20. This CPD has been closely aligned with the UNDAF, 2011 -2014, which
involved wide-ranging consultations with the Government and civil society partners.
UNDAF outcomes have served as the basis for UNICEF programme component
results because Iraq has not reported on the Conventions for many years, and the
recommendations could not be fully utilized.
Goals, key results and strategies
21. The main goal is to ensure that children are at the centre of the development
agenda in Iraq, with their full potential realized through a pro -child policy approach
ensuring integrated and harmonized services for children in areas such as child
protection, participation, well-being and development, guided by the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Protocols, the Millennium Development Goals and
the Millennium Declaration.
22. UNICEF will focus support on development of a National Policy for Children,
helping to ensure institutional working mechanisms, government budget
commitments for children and adolescents and strengthening of evidence -gathering
and analysis. Given the 2015 deadline for the Millennium Development Goals, the
country programme will focus its overarching programmatic chapeau on achieving
the Goals, while making the delivery structure geographically focused. This should
contribute not only to progress on all Goals but also to Articles 2, 6, 12 , 24, 26, 27,
28, 29, 39 and 40 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to targets of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

7

23. UNICEF will strengthen its work at three levels, as identified in the midter m
review: (a) national 8 through support to policies and legislation benefiting children
and women; (b) nationwide, incorporating key responses that affect children across
Iraq; and (c) area-based, concentrating on integrated, multi-sectoral investments in
targeted communities. This approach responds to strong Government requests for
upstream work and recognizes that Iraq is increasingly trying to take control of its
day-to-day direct service provision needs. Expanded capacity development includes
reforming systems, focusing on the rights of children and women. Piloting of
models at the local level will aim to promote child -centred structures and
investments to reduce disparities.
24. UNICEF will forge a more proactive role as the convener of, and catalyst fo r,
all stakeholders working for children and women, exploring opportunities to add
value. This approach will encourage enhanced use of an expanded evidence base
and analysis on child-related issues, strengthening relevant information management
systems. Broad partnerships that facilitate access to expertise and innovative
knowledge and technology for children and women will drive progress through
advocacy and participatory processes. These partnerships are expected to encompass
oil and telecommunications entities, universities, and arts and sports organizations.
UNICEF will also engage global partnerships to expand opportunities that promote
the rights of children and women. Coordination and collaboration among sectoral
programmes will be enhanced to mainstream cross-cutting issues.
25. Ongoing insecurity has compounded chronic vulnerabilities. UNICEF will
contribute to strengthening emergency preparedness and response systems. Even
though improvements are evident in the humanitarian landscape, UNICEF will
maintain response capacity to sudden-onset and emerging crises, including disease
outbreaks, mass casualty attacks, natural disasters and displacements. Humanitarian
action will continue to shift away from direct assistance to individuals towards the
creation and implementation of durable solutions, with a robust bridge to recovery
and development programming. Area-based responses will be implemented at
governorate or district level, aiming to identify durable solutions for some
4.5 million Iraqis. These will be implemented in partnership with a range of
stakeholders identified locally, with the active encouragement of participation from
civil society. Counterparts will play principal roles. NGO partners will be engaged
in accordance with their technical competencies and presence. Areas of technical
support for disaster risk management will focus on strengthening national
institutions to build resilience to hazards; developing and strengthening disaster risk
assessment and early warning systems; enhancing the use of knowledge and
innovation; and reducing development risk factors.
26. Finally, this process aims to identify which Millennium Development Goals
are achievable and where, and which major investments will be required from
stakeholders. A “band” of geographic areas with similar challenges will be selected
based on (a) Goals indicators; (b) expected contribution to national peacebuilding
and stability; and (c) integration with other United Nations interventions. Key
sectoral results will be better sequenced and disciplined, initially year by year, and
will serve as the basis for expected intermediate results. This vision encompasses
the aim of working with Iraq as a middle-income country by 2014.
__________________
8

8

Because the Constitution recognizes the authority of the Kurdistan Regional Government in the
north of Iraq, the CPD uses the nomenclature “national” and “nationwide.”

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The country programme will contribute to national development goals through
(a) the incorporation of provisions of the Conventions in the Constitution and
related policies, legislation and strengthening of monitoring mechanisms;
(b) integrated Government systems development regarding education, health and
nutrition, water, sanitation, and child protection; (c) enhanced quality of and access
to health and nutrition services; (d) increased enrolment, retention and completion
rates and reduced gender disparities in improved quality basic education;
(e) increased access to safe water and improved sanitation, with enhancement of
personal hygiene practices; (f) development of a sustainable peaceful environment
for children who are vulnerable to violence, abuse, exp loitation and neglect, in line
with international standards. Underpinning all is the provision for opportunities for
the participation of children and young people in decision-making.
28. The country programme thus reflects the vision and “integrated footprint” of
the United Nations that have informed the five priority areas of the UNDAF. It
contributes particularly to UNDAF outcomes 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 through support to
(a) improved governance, including the protection of human rights; (b) inclusive,
equitable and sustainable economic growth; (c) environmental management and
compliance with international environmental treaties and obligations; (d) increased
access to quality essential services; and (e) investment in human capital and
empowerment of women, youth and children.
29. The country programme likewise is congruent with PRS outcomes and targets
through support for improved health standards for the poor, increased enrolment in
basic education, a better living environment for the poor, pro -poor and childsensitive social protection, as well as increased gender equity.
Relationship to international priorities
30. The Convention on the Rights of the Child remains the beacon for the country
programme. Through increased emphasis on partnerships, the country programme
structure supports donor harmonization efforts in line with the Paris Declaration on
Aid Effectiveness. It has been guided by the Millennium Declaration and its rights based commitments, all eight Millennium Development Goals, and the Declar ation
and Plan of Action of A World Fit for Children. The Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women will guide gender-related issues. In
addition, all five priority areas of the MTSP, as well as the UNICEF Core
Commitments for Children in Emergencies, are reflected fully in the expected
results, including raising the quality of specific services and addressing common
issues of effective governance.
Programme components
31. Four major programme components — Survival and Growth; Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene; Quality Learning and Development; and Child Protection — will build
on the work of the previous country programme, with major strategic adjustments
noted above. Each component will have a maximum of two programme com ponent
results, emphasizing child-friendly policies and improved access to quality services,
while incorporating principles of disaster risk reduction and emergency
preparedness. PACKS will serve as a cross-cutting service creating an enabling

9

environment for robust knowledge management and evidence-based advocacy as
well as promoting community-level healthy lifestyle practices.
32. Survival and Growth. The programme will invest in two major programme
component results: strengthening the capacity of the Go vernment of Iraq to establish
an accountable policy framework, and supporting implementation mechanisms for
the delivery of quality basic services. The priority will be to support national,
governorate and primary health care providers and civil society to better formulate,
monitor and evaluate evidence-based, child-friendly and gender-sensitive health and
nutrition policies and systems.
33. The second result will be achieved through support to the Government to
improve access to and utilization of quality primary health care services for women
and children. Efforts will focus on supporting the Ministry of Health to ensure that
children and women have equitable access to quality maternal, newborn and
nutrition services, including primary prevention of HIV i n women in maternal and
child health settings, voluntary counselling and testing, and prevention of mother -tochild transmission of HIV/AIDS. Specific nutrition interventions to address
stunting, anaemia and other priority issues will include iron, folic a cid and iodine
supplementation; salt iodization and wheat flour fortification; and targeted growth
monitoring. Emphasis will be placed on addressing subnational disparities to
achieve Millennium Development Goals. Child injuries as a major killer of childr en
aged 1-17 years also will also be addressed. Acceleration of immunization services
through a Reach Every District approach will be supported, as well as the
introduction of new vaccines to reduce major childhood killer diseases. Partnerships
will be established with local universities, leading global public health institutions,
the private sector, and non-governmental organizations for operational research,
programme monitoring and development of new strategies.
34. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. The programme will contribute to improving
access to safe water and sanitation services. The focus will be on attainment of
related Millennium Development Goals through enabling authorities and civil
society to better formulate, monitor and evaluate evidence -based, child-friendly and
gender-sensitive water and sanitation policies and systems. Development of a
national Water and Sanitation Policy will be a priority. A second priority will be to
ensure that a total of 2 million people in vulnerable communities bene fit from new
or improved access to sustainable safe water, sanitation and waste services.
Increased emphasis will be placed on governorate-level programming and capacitybuilding. A functional cost-sharing mechanism with stakeholders will be supported,
promoting linkages among Government, academic and research institutes to
strengthen water governance. The programme will pilot initiatives to demonstrate
appropriate technologies and environmentally friendly approaches; strengthen
community participation and the involvement of women and youth; and introduce
the WASH -in-schools programme. Traditional infrastructure rehabilitation would be
reduced.
35. Quality Learning and Development. The programme will contribute to
ensuring that the Government of Iraq enables more women and children to have
improved access to and utilization of quality education. More specifically, 98 per
cent of children in selected governorates, with an emphasis on girls, will have
access to quality primary education that is inclusive and life skills-based. This
programme will also contribute to the development of evidence -based, gender-

10

sensitive policies and systems at national and governorate levels that support the
right of all children to access quality basic education. Child -friendly school models
will be scaled up and community-based engagement expanded. Particularly critical
will be support to development of governorate-level advocacy plans for education,
along with increased empowerment and involvement of community leaders and
families. Partnerships will be expanded with universities to strengthen teacher
professional development, as well as with the private sector to increase investments
in school construction/ rehabilitation.
36. Child Protection. The programme, under its first programme component
result, will accelerate a move towards strengthening child protection systems in
Iraq, simultaneously enabling the State to develop and implement policies and
programmes for the protection of boys and girls in line with international
conventions, the Iraqi Constitution and legislation. The second programme
component result will focus on ensuring that the Iraqi State has institutionalized
justice for children and preventive and protective mechanisms to combat child rights
violations, including gender-based violence. The programme will promote
restorative juvenile justice and enhanced mechanisms for data collection as means
to strengthen State reporting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Professional development of those who work in child protection will be undertaken
in collaboration with universities. Information on HIV prevention will be
disseminated to out-of-school children and adolescents, and scaling up of protection
services will focus on areas such as community-based psychosocial support linked
to the programmes in quality learning and development and in survival, growth and
early development.
37. PACKS. This programme component comprises strategic communication and
partnerships, including C4D; programme planning, monitoring and evaluation; and
programme implementation, coordination, and emergency response. The latter is
being mainstreamed into all sections and will be strengthened with the addition of a
dedicated coordinator. The first PACKS result will contribute to more efficient,
accountable and participatory governance at national and subnational levels.
Governorate and national authorities and civil society will be capacitated to better
formulate governorate-level Child Development Plans that serve as entry points for
social policies for children. This is expected to lead to the piloting of Child -Friendly
Cities as a key component of area-based programming and to the launch of an „Iraq
Fit for Children‟ movement, encompassing duty-bearers, communities and families,
including children themselves. A key goal is the mainstreaming of the practical
participation of youth in services, governance and legislative institutions at national
and subnational levels.
38. The second result will target vulnerable Iraqis with strategic ge nder-sensitive
research-to-policy initiatives, including means-tested social transfers. Emphasis will
be placed on research and advocacy for increased gender-sensitive and childfriendly social budgeting at all levels. IraqInfo, the Multiple Indicator Clus ter
Survey 4 (MICS 4), and other components of national data systems will be
strengthened to create a robust child-centred knowledge bank to aid evidence-based
decision-making, planning, monitoring and evaluation. Innovative partnerships will
be pursued to mobilize resources and advocate for children‟s rights. In particular,
PACKS will undertake a strategic shift towards measured the visibility of UNICEF
within security constraints.

11

39. Cross-sectoral costs cover
technology, security and logistics.

staffing,

information

and

communication

Major partnerships
40. Public-private partnerships centred on the use of new technologies to support
results for children will be critical. Strategic alliances with academia, civil society
and corporations will expand and strengthen the knowledge base and widen reach.
Partnerships will be strengthened with United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies; the World Bank and other international financial institutions; donors;
regional organizations such as the League of Arab States; governorate councils; civil
society organizations; media; and children and young people. UNICEF will
facilitate the “twinning” of cities in support of Child-Friendly Cities, as well as
similar twinning between academic institutions to further chi ld-relevant research.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
41. The Ministry of Planning and Development Cooperation is the major partner
and coordinator of the country programme planning and approval process. Line
ministries and departments are responsible for implementation and management of
programmes. At the subnational level, governorate and district administrations,
along with relevant departments, will assume responsibility for the partnership at
the local level. Annual work plans for each programme component result will be
monitored through quarterly and annual reviews and feed into national and UNDAF
reviews. To this end, UNICEF field presence across Iraq will be strengthened to
allow for more effective and expanded interaction with governorates and at national
level.
42. A major expansion in data collection and utilization, including through MICS
4, a national census, youth surveys and the IraqInfo system, will guide upstream
policy work as well as enhance reporting on progress towar ds Millennium
Development Goals. Studies and evaluations will be shared with relevant
stakeholders. Data-gathering activities for each programme component result will be
consolidated in the Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, linked to the
UNDAF monitoring framework and incorporating key indicators. UNICEF will be
an active participant in these endeavours.

12

