Jamaica
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Jamaica
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.20) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate & severe, 2007)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2001-2003)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2005)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

1
31
2
..
95 a
97/98 b
99 b

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

94

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

83

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

1.7

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2005)
(%, male/female, urban/rural)
GNI per capita (US$)

6
87
89/89, 89/88
5020

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

90

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

88

†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org.
89 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Inter-agency Group (World Health Organization, UNICEF, United Nations
Population Fund and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted
for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
According to the Economic and Social Survey Jamaica (ESSJ), 1 children make
up 33 per cent of the population, while adolescents and youth aged 18 -24 comprise
11 per cent. The youthful population, coupled with high unemployment among those
aged 14-24 (27 per cent in 2009: males 22.5 per cent; females 33 per cent),
contributes to a high level of economic and social dependence. The economy faces
serious long-term problems, including high inflation and the fourth-highest debt-togross domestic product ratio per capita in the world (debt servicing: 54 cent s per
dollar spent). While poverty declined over the last decade (from 19.9 per cent in
1997 to 9.9 per cent in 2007), it remains high, and in 2009 jumped to 16.5 per cent,
representing approximately half a million Jamaicans. Seventy-one per cent of poor
Jamaicans live in rural areas. Children account for an estimated 42 per cent of the
poor — one in every four children lives in poverty.

__________________
1

2

ESSJ 2007-2009, Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ).

2.
The Gini index of Jamaica (45.5) 2 — unchanged since 2004 — indicates that
the island has one of the highest levels of disparities and inequalities globally.
Children most affected by disparities are boys and girls living in poor rural
communities; those affected by violence and crime in communities; physically,
sexually and emotionally abused children; out-of-school children, especially boys;
children out of family care; and boys and girls who experience marginalization or
discrimination, including children living with disabilities and those infected or
affected by HIV/AIDS.
3.
Jamaica has been lagging behind the targets relevant to achieving Millennium
Development Goals 3, 4, 5 and 7. 3
4.
Jamaican children face significant challenges in access to and quality of health
care. Under-five mortality rates (31 deaths per 1,000 live births, 4 2009) and infant
mortality rates (26 deaths per 1,000 live births, 5 2009) have remained high. Less
than 15 per cent of children are exclusively breastfed at six months, and disabilities
among children are estimated to be 10 per cent. 6 A reported 25 per cent of
adolescents aged 15-19 are overweight or obese, while 37 per cent of boys and
11 per cent of girls aged 10-15 consume alcohol. 7
5.
Access to non-familial day care for children under 3 is low (less than 20 per
cent) and concentrated among higher-income groups. However, over 98 per cent of
children aged 4-6 enrol in preschools — predominantly community-based facilities,
most of which do not meet national standards for early childhood institutions.
6.
Despite high levels of access to primary (99.7 per cent) and secondary (83 per
cent) schooling, the educational achievement of the Jamaican child is relatively low
as measured by national assessments in 2009. 8 Upon entering grade 1, none of the
five sub-tests of the assessment was mastered by more than 24 per cent of the six year-olds; 18 per cent of them did not master a single sub-test. At grade 4, 70 per
cent showed mastery of the literacy test (girls 81 per cent; boys 59 per cent) and
45 per cent demonstrated mastery of the numeracy test (girls 55 per cent; boys
36 per cent). At grade 6, the average score in four subjects tested was just over
50 per cent. Of particular concern is the low achievement of boys and children from
the poorest and/or most volatile (predominantly violence-prone) communities.
7.
Jamaica has one of the highest murder rates 9 in the world. The cumulative
effect of children’s exposure to violence has a devastating impact on learning and
behaviour. Every day, between 2006 and October 2009, 10 17 children and
adolescents aged 0-19 were treated in emergency rooms for intentional violencerelated injuries, which included over 11,100 cases of sexual assault, stab wounds,
gunshots and blunt force injury. Between January and July 2009, boys and girls aged
__________________
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

Human Development Report 2010, United Nations Development Programme.
National Report of Jamaica on the Millennium Development Goals for the United Nations
Economic and Social Council, July 2009.
The State of the World’s Children, UNICEF, 2011.
Ibid., 2011.
ESSJ 2009, PIOJ.
Jamaica Youth Risk and Resiliency Behaviour Survey, (JYRRBS), 2005.
Ministry of Education Report for 2009.
58/100,000. Source: List of Countries by Intentional Homicide Rates, Wikipedia; See also
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, International Homicide Statistics, 2004.
ESSJ 2006-2009; PIOJ.

3

10-19 accounted for 26.2 per cent of all intentional injuries, 30 per ce nt of all stab
wound cases, 35 per cent of all attempted suicides, 17 per cent of all psychiatric
cases and, notably, 61 per cent of all Jamaicans who reported being sexually
assaulted (mainly girls). In 2010, 4,500 cases of abuse were reported to the Offi ce of
the Children’s Registry.
8.
Increasingly, children are perpetrators of criminal activities and coming into
contact or conflict with the law. During 2009, 1,443 children (of whom 181 were
girls) appeared before the courts for murder, sexual abuse, robbery, wounding and
possession of firearms. 11
9.
Jamaica is experiencing a generalized HIV epidemic, with an estimated
prevalence of 1.7 per cent. Adolescent boys and girls are among the most at risk for
infection due to a prevailing culture of multiple sexual partnerships and inconsistent
condom use. The 2008 National Knowledge, Attitudes, Behaviours and Practices
survey jointly conducted by the Ministry of Health and Hope Enterprises, Ltd.,
reported that 37 per cent of sexually active respondents had engag ed in sex in
exchange for money or gifts in the past 12 months and 43 per cent had not used a
condom the last time they had sex. Pregnancies among girls 15 -19 accounted for
18 per cent of live births in 2008. The Ministry of Health reports that over 33 pe r
cent of girls and 18 per cent of boys aged 10-15 did not consent to their first sexual
encounter.
10. Adolescent girls aged 10-19 are almost three times more likely to become
infected with HIV than boys of the same age as a result of early sexual initia tion,
sexual relations with HIV-infected older men, forced sex and prevalent unsafe
sexual practices. A 2007 Ministry of Health survey among 201 men who have sex
with men found that one of every three was infected with HIV.
11. Jamaica has not been compliant with its reporting obligations to the United
Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child. The combined third and fourth
report, due in June 2008, and the report on implementation of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, due in 2004, have not been submitted to date.
12. Jamaica is vulnerable to hurricanes and tropical storms. Natural disasters have
cost the country approximately J$100 billion over the last 20 years. 12

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
13. UNICEF technical and cash assistance — operationalized through capacity
development, effective advocacy, knowledge generation and management and
partnerships — resulted in strengthened frameworks for policy, legislation,
monitoring, knowledge generation and institutions, as exemplified in: (a) the
development and implementation of the National Strategic Plan for Safe
Motherhood and the National Strategic Plan for HIV/AIDS 2007-2012, which for
the first time included orphans and children made vulnerable by HIV; (b) the
__________________
11
12

4

Ibid., 2009.
Gladstone Hutchinson, Director General of the PIOJ, Jamaica Observer, October 13, 2010.

development of the National Parenting Policy and National Safe Schools Policy;
(c) the development of the National Strategic Plan for Pre -adolescent and
Adolescent Health, which is the first such planning tool in the English -speaking
Caribbean; (d) the establishment and operationalization of the Office of the
Children’s Registry, an organization which receives reports on child abuse and
makes appropriate referrals; (e) the institutionalization of JamStats (the DevInfo of
Jamaica) and the use of DevInfo in data management by planning experts, other
professionals and students; (f) the development and annual organization of the
Caribbean Child Research Conference, which has strengthened links among
academicians, professionals and practitioners, policy-makers and students,
facilitated the exchange of information and best practices and engaged the
meaningful participation of children; and (g) the developmen t of a standardized
framework for training and certification of early childhood practitioners and
community health workers for the benefit of children aged 0 -6.
14. Collaboration with the University of the West Indies resulted in the
development and institutionalization of the graduate course “Social Investment for
Children” and the development and implementation of the training course on child
rights for social workers, police and correctional officers.
15. Implementation of the life skills-based Health and Family Life Education
curriculum, which included curriculum revision, material development, in -service
teacher training and policy revision in schools supported by UNICEF, reached
630,000 boys and girls from 87 per cent of primary and secondary schools.
16. The establishment of an adolescent-friendly mobile HIV prevention,
counselling and testing service (“Bashy Bus”) has so far impacted 68,000 at -risk
and/or hard-to-reach boys (28,000) and girls (40,000) in poor rural and volatile
urban communities in five parishes. The Bashy Bus approach to reaching
adolescents is currently being integrated into the public health services.
17. Capacity to support the delivery of quality education and health care has
improved as 2,500 professionals enhanced their knowl edge and skills in areas such
as managing child health and nutrition, improving parental practices and managing
learning disabilities. Since 2010, the health sector of Jamaica has been collecting
growth data for children aged 0-5 in accordance with international standards.
18. Child-friendly preparedness and response to emergencies was strengthened
through the development of Guidelines for the Development of Emergency
Preparedness and Response Plans and finalization of these plans in 94 schools and
child care institutions in parishes affected by natural disasters. The development and
dissemination of the training manual and toolkit “Psychosocial Support for Children
in Emergencies” and the creation of a group of 76 master trainers enabled the
provision of better quality psychosocial support and referrals for children affected
by emergencies.
19. The capacity of the Ministry of Education to prevent, reduce and better
respond to violence against children in school was strengthened through
development and use of the “Anger Management and Conflict Resolution” package
and the training of 418 principals, teachers and guidance counsellors. In 40
violence-prone communities, more than 30,000 boys and girls and their 3,800
caregivers benefited from community and school-based anger management and
conflict resolution activities.

5

Lessons learned
20. The current programme attempted to achieve results in a wide range of areas.
Various reviews strongly indicate the need to focus on fewer programmes and
results to maximize effect.
21. HIV prevention interventions targeting pre-adolescents and adolescents need
to be part of a holistic development approach to be more successful. Policies must
support adolescent-friendly approaches that identify and target the most vulnerable
boys and girls in underserved communities.
22. Capacity gaps and weak collaboration among key duty
delay programme achievement and reduce overall impact.
capacity gaps in partner organizations and the development o f
plans should take place at the initial stage. Action plans should
opportunities focusing on results-based management.

bearers significantly
Deeper analysis of
corresponding action
also include learning

23. More targeted and evidence-based advocacy strategies are required to
influence and quicken the pace of change in the development and implementation of
child-related policies, legislation, planning and programming over the long -term.
24. Efforts in child protection are significantly affected by the absence of a
comprehensive child protection system and the very slow pace of policy and
legislative reform. Stronger accountability and better coordination among duty
bearers within the child protection sector are required to concurrently create
enabling policies and legislation and provide a protec tive environment.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Adolescent health and empowerment

717

3 200

3 917

Quality education

717

3 300

4 017

Child protection

717

3 300

4 017

1 599

300

1 899

3 750

10 100

13 850

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
25. The CPD was developed in conjunction with the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF), beginning with a Common Country Assessment
and including a prioritization workshop with the Government of Jamaica held in
December 2010. The CPD development further benefited from annual reviews and
work plan meetings and a midterm review of the 2007-2011 programme of
cooperation, which involved extensive consultations with partner organizations from
government, donor representatives, United Nations agencies and civil society,
including young people. The CPD is additionally informed by the 2003 Concluding

6

Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the draft 2010
National Periodic Report to the Committee.
26. The draft CPD has been discussed with the Planning Institute of Jamaica and
key strategic and implementing partners.
Goals, key results and strategies
27. The overall goal of the country programme is to contribute to the realization of
the rights of Jamaican girls and boys by focusing on further reduction of disparities
and inequalities. The country programme will support national efforts towards social
inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized families and children, especially those
living in poor rural communities, as well as boys and girls affected by violence and
crime and other children whose rights are systematically violated.
28. The country programme will achieve these key results by 2016: (a) 50 per cent
of the most vulnerable adolescent boys and girls aged 10 -18 in targeted communities
will be equipped with life skills, access quality health-care services and contribute
to decision-making in their communities; (b) child victims of abuse and violence
and children who come into contact and conflict with the law will benefit from
improved child protection services; and (c) in the poorest and most volatile
communities of Jamaica, 40 per cent of 6-year-old girls and boys entering primary
school will have mastered all components of the entrance assessment, and the
performance of fourth-grade boys and girls on national math and literacy
assessments will have improved by 30 per cent.
29. The programme will adopt a two-tiered approach, supporting policy, planning,
programme and regulatory frameworks at the national level and equity-focused
model programmes at the community level. National-level advocacy will capitalize
on knowledge generated through research, evaluation and disaggregated data on age,
gender and location. Targeted communities will be those determined to be poorest
and most volatile, based on the Government’s vulnerability and volatility indices.
30. Equity, child-friendly emergency preparedness and response, gender and
children’s participation will be cross-cutting issues of the country programme. The
gender-focused approach will emphasize violence prevention, HIV/AIDS and
education. The programme will also incorporate stronger and high er quality
monitoring and evaluation strategies.
31. Building alliances with a wide range of partners will be key to the success of
the country programme. Another central strategy will be using the convening role of
UNICEF to facilitate multi-partner and cross-sectoral coordination and integrated
programming and strategic planning. There will also be a tighter focus on
implementing Communication for Development strategies to foster sustained
changes in behaviour. More targeted advocacy strategies will be i mplemented to
broadly make the case for investing in the most vulnerable groups and, specifically,
to influence key policy, legislative and programming decisions at the national level.
32. Special attention will be paid to supporting the Government in mak ing better
use of existing data; strengthening the collection, analysis and timely reporting of
disaggregated data; and generating, managing and disseminating knowledge,
including documentating experiences. UNICEF will also help the Government to
comply with its Convention reporting obligations.

7

33. This country programme will contribute to and benefit from multi -country
initiatives in the areas of education, child protection and data collection and
management.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
34. The new country programme has been aligned with the national development
priorities of the Government of Jamaica, as articulated in the National Development
Plan “Vision 2030” and its medium-term framework, the National Strategic Plan for
Early Childhood Development 2008-2013, the National Strategic Plan for
HIV/AIDS 2007-2012 and several sector-wide plans. Prepared alongside the
UNDAF, the country programme contributes to two outcomes of United Nations
support in Jamaica: (a) safety, security and justice; and (b) social empowerment and
equity. UNICEF leadership areas within the UNDAF relate to social inclusion, with
a focus on expanded access to quality health, education and protection services for
vulnerable boys and girls and their families. Enhancing national data generation and
management systems will also be emphasized.
Relationship to international priorities
35. The Millennium Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals and the
priorities of the UNICEF Medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013, are integrated
into the country programme, with a strong focus on equity, gender equality and
social inclusion of the most vulnerable boys and girls who live in poor and/or
volatile communities.
36. The country programme embodies the guiding principles of the Convention. Its
design, strategies and planned results are also guided by the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, A World Fit for
Children, the World Declaration on Education for All, the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and
Accra Agenda for Action. It will contribute to Caribbean integration by supporting
priorities and goals defined in the United Nations Caribbean Community Regional
Framework of Action for Children 2002-2015 and to the establishment of a Child
Rights Observatory to monitor the realization of children’s rights in the Caribbean.
Programme components
37. The new country programme comprises three components: (a) adolescent
health and empowerment; (b) child protection; and (c) quality education. These
three interrelated components will assist the Government and other key partners in
the effort to ensure that marginalized boys and girls benefit equally from social
services and to create an enabling environment for the realization of children’s
rights.
38. Adolescent health and empowerment. The programme component will
achieve the following results by 2016: 50 per cent of the most vulnerable adolescent
boys and girls aged 10-18 in targeted communities will be equipped with life skills,
access quality health-care services and contribute to decision-making in their
communities.
39. The programme will develop minimum standards and protocols for the
delivery of adolescent-friendly services within the health sector and capacity-

8

building activities for health-care workers. UNICEF and its partners will advocate
for improved access to voluntary, confidential counselling and testing for HIV for
adolescents under age 16. This will involve forging adolescent-adult partnerships
and engaging in dialogue with policy makers and public opinion leaders. The
programme will also seek to generate knowledge relating to specific health issues
affecting the most vulnerable boys and girls in poor and volatile comm unities, as
well as to major challenges facing adolescents most at risk for HIV, including men
who have sex with men, sex workers and girls who engage in transactional sexual
relationships. UNICEF will continue to provide technical support for the
establishment of performance frameworks for improved monitoring and evaluation
within the systems that serve adolescents. At the community level, efforts will focus
on equipping vulnerable and hard-to-reach adolescents with knowledge and life
skills to improve their health-seeking behaviours and reduce their vulnerabilities to
lifestyle-related health issues, including HIV, obesity and substance abuse. Sports
and arts-for-development programmes will be established or expanded as necessary
for at-risk adolescents, especially boys.
40. The programme will support a comprehensive assessment of the effectiveness
of current participation mechanisms to enhance adolescent participation in
community and national level decision-making. Strategies thereafter will engage
young people through existing networks, but will also seek to connect with boys and
girls who are underserved and outside of such networks. A particular focus will be
the enhancement of mechanisms at the local government level to facilitate dialogue
between adolescents in local communities and policy makers.
41. UNICEF will collaborate with key Government partners, including the
Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Youth, Culture
and Sports. Non-traditional partners, such as the Department of Local Government,
the Sports Development Foundation and youth-led agencies working at the
community level, will also be engaged. Sister agencies, including the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO)/World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, will be
key strategic partners.
42. The activities described will take place in tandem with the Ministry of Health ’s
draft National Strategic Plan for Pre-adolescent and Adolescent Health 2011-2015,
the National Youth Policy, and the National HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan. UNICEF
will seek to establish stronger links among the partners for increased efficiency and
effectiveness in service delivery to vulnerable adolescents.
43. Child protection. The programme component will achieve the following
result by December 2016: child victims of abuse and violence and children who
come into contact and conflict with the law will benefit from improved child
protection services. The programme will focus on child victims and witnesses of
abuse and violence, boys and girls in residential care, children who come into
contact or conflict with the law, children who live or work on the street, wor king
children and the families of these highly vulnerable boys and girls.
44. UNICEF will support interventions in child justice and the prevention and
reduction of violence against children that are national in scope and focus on:
(a) development of the National Child Diversion Programme; (b) development of
protocols for the treatment of child victims and child witnesses; (c) strengthening of

9

psycho-social support and counselling; and (d) implementation of the National Plan
of Action on Child Justice. Special attention will be placed on gender-based
violence affecting girls up to age 18 and a review of the Child Care and Protection
Act and other child-focused legislation.
45. To further improve the quality of the child protection system and its services,
UNICEF and its partners will focus on capacity-building, most of which will be
implemented during the first two years of the programme. A comprehensive
assessment, including a gap analysis of child protection services, will begin before
the commencement of the new country programme and will continue in 2012, along
with the finalization of a strategic plan for an effective child protection system.
46. UNICEF and its partners will advocate for zero tolerance of violence against
children, alternative forms of discipline and changes in cultural practices that are
harmful to children, including a complete ban of corporal punishment. Advocacy
will also focus on inclusive care as well as child-friendly rehabilitation and
reintegration options for the most vulnerable children. Community-based Child
Protection Committees will encourage families and communities to support the
Government’s child protection efforts.
47. Greater effort will be made to support knowledge generation by UNICEF
partners, as well as information-sharing and the accessibility and utilization of
gender and age-disaggregated data relevant to the child protection sector.
48. To achieve the programme component result, UNICEF will partner with the
Child Development Agency, the Ministry of Justice, the Office of the Children’s
Advocate, the Office of the Children’s Registry, the Ministry of Labour and Social
Security, the Ministry of National Security, the Ministry of Health and relevant
community-based organizations. Efforts will also be made to collaborate with major
international development partners and United Nations agencies that support child
justice and child labour and violence prevention, such as UNDP and the
International Labour Organization.
49. Quality education. The programme component will contribute to ensuring
that by the end of 2016, in the poorest and most volatile communities of Jamaica,
40 per cent of 6-year-olds entering primary school master the entrance assessment,
and the performance of fourth-grade children on national math and literacy
assessments improves by 30 per cent.
50. Establishment of the Early Childhood Commission (ECC) and increased
government funding have significantly strengthened the Early Childhood
Development (ECD) sector, necessitating a shift in how UNICEF s upports efforts in
ECD. This programme component, therefore, focuses on improving school readiness
of boys and girls aged 3-6 and the performance of primary-level students. At the
community-level, the programme will work intensively with pre-primary and
primary schools to help them become child-friendly. Capacity-building and
technical support for improved parenting practices, teaching and learning
environments will contribute to the increased readiness of boys and girls for
transition to the next levels. Technical support, capacity development and advocacy
for improved school governance (including leadership and student participation),
gender-sensitive teaching methods, teacher professional development and school
safety (including positive methods of discipline and emergency preparedness) will
improve learning experiences for boys and girls. This programme will support

10

stronger school-family-community partnerships by fostering the development of
community-wide committees that facilitate multi-sectoral involvement in schools.
51. At the national level, the curricula in Health and Family Life Education
(HFLE), with improved content related to rights, conflict resolution, and gender,
will be implemented in pre-primary, primary and secondary schools. Additionall y,
support will be provided for pre-service teacher training, with a focus on HFLE,
school safety and emergency preparedness and response.
52. The programme will contribute to robust knowledge generation and
management. Strategic advocacy efforts will focus on quality education for all, as
well as child health and nutrition and maternal and infant mortality reduction.
53. To maximize efficiencies and ensure sustainability of the programme,
partnerships will be strengthened with the Ministry of Health, the ECC, UNFPA,
PAHO/WHO, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), teacher-training institutions, and civil society organizations (CSOs)
working in schools. New partnerships will be forged with teacher unions and CSOs
working to impact school culture and the targeted communities.
54. This programme complements the National Strategic Plan for ECD, the United
States Agency for International Development’s Basic Education Program being
implemented in 200 primary schools, and the Ministry of Education’s Education
Transformation Programme.
55. Cross-sectoral costs will cover recurrent costs for activities not directly
attributable to one programme, such as travel, equipment and salaries for staff
performing cross-cutting functions, including monitoring, evaluation and
programme administration.
Major partnerships
56. Strengthening existing partnerships and expanding new and innovative
partnerships will be a central strategy in the new cooperative programme.
Traditional partnerships with the Planning Institute of Jamaica, all relevant line
ministries and the three main child protection agencies will remain the cornerstone
of the programme. New partnerships with CSOs working within the poorest and/or
most volatile communities will be developed. Efforts will continue to strengthen the
collaborative relationship among UNICEF, other members of the United Nations
country team and other international donor partners to support national partners in
the areas of human rights and equity, education, peace, justice and security,
HIV/AIDS and emergency preparedness and response.
57. As part of a stronger advocacy and communication strategy, UNICEF will
consolidate and strategically focus partnerships with the media. Involvement of
partners for children’s rights in the sports and entertainment fields will continue to
be explored. Partnerships with youth groups will continue and expand in order to
strengthen work in child participation.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
58. Implementation of the current cooperation arrangement will be monitored
through joint annual reviews and a midterm review of progress in 2014. A five -year
integrated monitoring and evaluation plan will outline support to national

11

monitoring systems and the undertaking of research and evaluation activities,
including participatory action research with adolescents.
59. The Situation Analysis of Children 2011, the findings of the 2011 Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey, the JamStats database and other national s urveys and
statistics will be used to establish baselines and monitor progress under the country
programme and towards the Millennium Development Goals, recommendations of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child and A World Fit for Children outcomes. A
comprehensive review of the child protection system will be conducted in the first
half of the country programme. Additional research will be undertaken as needed to
provide more in-depth analysis on key issues related to equity and disparity.
60. UNICEF will support national capacities to collect, analyse and disseminate
disaggregated data in a timely manner through technical and financial assistance, as
part of a national move to promote evidence-based planning and programme
development, results-based management and a human rights-based approach to
development.
61. The Planning Institute of Jamaica will be responsible for the overall
coordination of the country programme.

12

