Kazakhstan
Country programme document
2010-2015

The draft country programme document for Kazakhstan
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.8) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 annual session (8-10 June
2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

†

Basic data
(2007 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

4.6
32

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1994-2006)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

4
70 a
99/98 b
100
96

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

97

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years)

0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)
GNI per capita (US$)

2
5 060

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

93

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

99

†
a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 140 per 100,000 live births. See
http://www.childinfo.org/areas/maternalmortality/.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Kazakhstan is considered one of the most economically developed countries
among the Commonwealth of Independent States, with its gross domestic product
(GDP) having increased at an average annual rate of 9 -10 per cent during 20002007. However, the global financial crisis, which has reduced GDP by a lmost one
third, could affect the social sector. Nevertheless, the Government is currently
maintaining social programmes, especially those for children and families.
2.
The level of poverty, concentrated in rural areas, had decreased to 15 per cent
by 2007 (World Bank). Targeted State social allowances were provided to more than
500,000 low-income citizens, 62 per cent of them from rural areas and 61 per cent
of them children. Other incentives were provided, such as a doubled State childbirth
allowance, increased monthly childcare allowance and additional support to families
with children.
3.
While expenditures in health, education and social protection grew in absolute
terms in 2007, the GDP share allocated to the social sector has remained relatively
low. Funding for health, for example, increased from 1.9 per cent to 2.3 per cent of
GDP between 2003 and 2007, and funding for education increased from 3.2 per cent
to 3.6 per cent of GDP over the same period. After reviewing the State party report
of Kazakhstan, the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2007 recommended the
prioritization of, and increased budget for, disadvantaged children.
4.
The country is on track to reach Millennium Development Goal 4 on child
mortality, provided that additional efforts are directed towards reducing preventable
perinatal deaths, which is the main cause of infant mortality, together with acute
respiratory infections and diarrhoea. Accidents and trauma are a major cause of

2

child mortality. According to the 2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, anaemia
affects 45 per cent of reproductive-age women, while iron-deficiency anaemia and
vitamin A deficiency affect 36 and 57 per cent, respectively, of children 6 -59 months
old. The quality of maternal and child health (MCH) se rvices is affected by systemwide weaknesses in norms, standards and practices.
5.
Inequality and disparities between urban and rural areas affect many children.
The under-five mortality rate is 41 per cent higher in rural areas (42.6 as opposed to
30.2 deaths per 1,000 live births, respectively), while in the poorest quintile it is
more than two times higher than the richest quintile (40.5 and 16 deaths per 1,000
live births, respectively). More prosperous regions in the north provide higher
preschool opportunities: 24 per cent in urban areas and 7 per cent in rural areas.
6.
Goal 2, on education, has been achieved at primary, secondary and higher
education levels, except for pre-primary education; only 20 per cent of children
have access to preschool. The sector’s performance is enhanced by the introduction
of a national education quality assessment, an external monitoring system for
learning achievements and an increase in the number of teachers. The remaining
challenges are to improve the quality of education and the inclusion of children with
disabilities.
7.
The country has formally achieved Goal 3 on primary and secondary
education. In 2005, the Gender Strategy was adopted, and the National Commission
on Women and Demographic and Family Policy is now functional. Women
constitute 54 per cent of civil servants, but only 10 per cent of these women hold
decision-making positions.
8.
While Government programmes and resources support child protection and
juvenile justice services, the issue of children depr ived of parental and family care
persists. In 2008, a total of 76,308 children were in residential education and care
institutions, including 17,500 children deprived of parental care. Preventing the
separation of children from their families needs greater attention. Foster care
represents an alternative to residential education and care but is hampered by
limited resources and complex procedures. Adoption is another issue requiring
attention. More than 25,000 children were adopted (domestic 74 per cent,
international 24 per cent) between 1998 and 2006 (Ministry of Education and
Science). Kazakhstan has not yet ratified the Hague Convention on Inter-Country
Adoption. The gaps in domestic and inter-country policies and legislation, effective
monitoring, and follow-up of adoptions are areas of concern.
9.
Rates concerning children in conflict with the law, convictions and custodial
sentences decreased after peaking in the mid-1990s. The country is committed to the
creation of a juvenile justice system that complies with international standards and
best practices. The Juvenile Justice System Development Concept was approved by
the Government, together with the piloting of specialized juvenile courts and
juvenile police units.
10. Child exploitation and trafficking are other protection issues. These practices
are seasonal, increasing during the warm season when agricultural work begins and
when homeless children appear on the streets, becoming prey to potential
traffickers. There are no data on the extent of this phenomenon.
11. HIV infections are increasing, including among women. The proportion of
women among newly registered cases of HIV rose from 19 per cent in 2001 to

3

26 per cent in 2007. One illustration of how the disease can spread and of gaps in
the health care system occurred in 2006 in southern Kazakhstan, where 147 children
suffering mainly from acute respiratory infections and/or diarrhoea were infected
with HIV in paediatric hospitals as a result of prolonged hospitalization and
excessive treatment that exposed them to infection.
12. Mortality among adolescents (15-19) and young people (20-24) is an emerging
problem. Among countries in the region, Kazakhstan has the second -highest
mortality rate among adolescents aged 15-19 due to external causes, the highest
suicide rates among male and female adolescents aged 15 -19 and the highest
mortality rate for males and females aged 20-24 (TransMonee, 2007). No study has
analysed the causes.
13. Kazakhstan also faces environmental issues. In the Semipalatinsk region,
where the population in the past has been exposed to high levels of nuclear radiation
and significant radioactive pollution, health problems continue. Past
mismanagement of irrigation projects caused the level of the Aral Sea to drop
significantly. Recently, due to the efforts of large projects run by the Government
and the World Bank, the water level has risen about 4 metres. The fishing industry
has experienced a gradual revival, increasing its catch from 200 tons in 2005 to as
much as 2,000 in 2006 (World Bank progress report, 2007). Risks from natural
disasters also include major earthquakes, to which the South-East of Kazakhstan,
specifically Almaty, is highly vulnerable.
14. Generally, the approach to children’s issues requires more integration, a fact
recognized by the Government. Currently, programme delivery remains vertical.
Moreover, measures for the timely detection of developmental problems and their
early correction are not yet fully incorporated into MCH policies. In child
protection, gaps result from the fragmentation of roles involving a cross -section of
implementers from various sectors.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved
15. The programme modelled a child-friendly schools (CFS) strategy in two
regions and scaled it up in three more regions. Coverage of children enrolled in CFS
increased from 2 per cent in 2005 to 20 per cent by 2008, covering a total of
123,000 children. The CFS assessment methodology and training progra mme have
also been included in pre- and in-service teacher training institutions in the East
Kazakhstan region. The relative delay in incorporating the CFS concept into
education policies allowed for a more exact tailoring of CFS components to local
realities.
16. The piloting of the Better Parenting initiative at the local level was assessed,
documented and used for the introduction of better early childhood care and
development practices. This model has been endorsed and is now part of national
regulations. Over 50 per cent of nurses in the Southern Kazakhstan and Semey
regions were trained in empowering parents in better care for young children, and
especially for girls. The 2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey reported that 81 per

4

cent of household members were engaging in activities that promote learning and
school readiness.
17. The programme also contributed to major social sector reforms and the
rationalization and improvement of services for children. A basic benefit package of
free health services for children, pregnant women and adolescents was introduced as
part of the reform. It includes free services and medicines from primary to tertiary
health care to ensure universal access. In partnership with the Asian Development
Bank, the country achieved the elimination of iodine deficiency. Introduction of
youth-friendly services began at primary health care facilities. In child protection,
several alternative care services were introduced.
18. The programme is contributing to the new United Nations joint development
programme to reduce poverty and improve access to quality basic social services in
the former Semipalatinsk Nuclear Testing Area. In cooperation with the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and other organizations, the programme contributed to the development and
implementation of the national 2006-2016 Gender Strategy and the Government
Disaster Preparedness strategy by promoting the integration of disaster risk
reduction into the school curriculum.
Lessons learned
19. The 2007 midterm review of the country programme recognized programme
contributions in reshaping policy designs. However, the regulatory frameworks and
implementation guidelines had not been clearly established, and therefore there
were gaps in the healthcare and child protection systems. It was recommended that
the basis/evidence for coherent policies be strengthened and supplemented by
building capacities to implement further system reforms. These should also help in
identifying a holistic system approach and avoiding fragmentation of roles and
unclear accountabilities. Therefore, the new country programme will emphasize
strengthening the data/evidence base and building capacities to gather and use
information for policy design and its effective implementation.
20. The outbreak of HIV in southern Kazakhstan illustrated shortfalls in the care
of children by families, the primary health care system and hospitals. In accelerating
health system reform, particularly MCH, special emphasis should be given to
transitioning from ineffective input- driven planning and budgeting procedures to
results-based budgeting and evidence-based, quality-oriented and well-monitored
planning and implementation. The increasing risk that HIV poses to c hildren and
women can be addressed by ensuring establishment of functional horizontal linkages
in an otherwise vertical health programme and by mainstreaming prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV and paediatric AIDS in MCH, together with
efforts to reduce stigma and discrimination, including discriminatory attitudes and
practices of health workers.
21. In child protection, the strong focus on de-institutionalization has resulted in a
transformation of standards of care in many institutions and i n some progress on
introducing foster care, but it has not yet translated into overall reform of the
childcare system or a significant reduction in the number of children placed in
institutions. The persistence of favourable perceptions of institutional ca re at local
and regional levels was not addressed. In addition, the fragmented gatekeeping
structures of the social protection system as a whole, which favour institutional

5

placement, were not adequately transformed. The new programme will lend support
to the development of policy initiatives that (a) place de -institutionalization and
childcare reform more centrally within the social care reform agenda; (b) address
structural bias that favours institutionalization; and (c) develop alternatives and
improve standards and practices.

The country programme, 2010-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Social policy and alliances for children

1 950

870

2 820

Strengthening systems for a protective
environment for children

3 104

3 670

6 774

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

268
5 322

268
4 540

9 862

Preparation process
22. The preparation of the new country programme started with the 2007 midterm
review, which, along with the national and global development agenda, formed the
framework. Technical and high-level consultations with the Government,
Parliament, academia, civil society and international organizations helped to
sharpen the strategic focus towards achievement of national priorities for children
and women. The outcome recommendations of the 2007 international forum on
“Increasing Social Orientation of Budgets and Efficiency of Public Expenditures in
the Best Interests of Children and Families in Kazakhstan” guided the shift in focus
to leverage more resources and apply effective public policies for children.
Collaboration with United Nations agencies in designing the 2010 -2015 United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) helped to sharpen the
country programme’s focus on priorities and strategic areas. The Joint UNDAF
Strategy Meeting with the Government and partners was held on 16 May 2008.
Goals, key results and strategies
23. The country programme aims to support the Government of Kazakhstan in
improving the quality of life of children, with special attention paid to vulnerable
groups and to the reduction in regional and gender-based disparities. The
overarching priorities will be to support national policies and budgets for inclusive
and rights-based social services that promote greater investments in human capital
and systems strengthening. This will contribute to translating economic growth into
visible improvement in the well-being of both girls and boys.
24. The country programme will contribute to the following key results:
(a) human, financial and organizational resources are redirected towards plans and
programmes that address gender and social disparities in the best interests of boys
and girls; (b) implementation of child rights commitments is reported yearly and
followed up; (c) children, adolescents, youth and women are actively participating

6

in social and health service programmes that promote the civic engagement of these
groups to realize their rights, and life skills-based education is integrated into the
curriculum nationwide; (d) 20 per cent more families have access to and use MCH
and early childhood development (ECD) services that comply with international
norms and standards; (e) the anaemia rate among women of reproductive age and
children under five is reduced by 15 per cent, and vitamin A deficiency is eliminated
among children 6-59 months; (f) the ratio of children in institutional care to children
in alternative family- or community-based care has improved from 80/20 to 70/30,
and there are 20 per cent fewer children in formal care; (g) there is an increase of
20 per cent in the number of children in conflict with the law who are diverted to
non-punitive care and preventive services; and (h) at least 90 per cent of pregnant
women who are HIV positive receive services for prevention of HIV transmission
from mother to child, and the use of HIV prevention services by most -at-risk
adolescents has increased to 30 per cent in exposed areas.
25. Concerted efforts will be directed at the macro level, with the aim of assisting
the Government in making policies that are more rights based and gender sensitive.
Evidence-based and quality research and analysis will be consolidated and will
provide a vital source of knowledge to influence the d esign of policies and
regulatory frameworks that are more consistent with global standards and norms.
The foundations for building stronger alliances with the private sector, civil society
representatives and the Government will be established. Multidiscip linary and crosssector system-strengthening will build on institutional capacity development for
improved governance for children and delivery of quality services in MCH,
micronutrients, ECD, HIV/AIDS prevention/care, education, child protection and
adolescent development, and will promote progress in gender equality. Subnational
work will be continued by helping local authorities in the South and East
Kazakhstan regions to address more effectively preventable risks to child survival
and protection. Communication for development will be a cross-cutting strategy for
behaviour change.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
26. The country programme of cooperation will contribute to improving the
quality of life for all, focusing on children and women. By doing this, the
programme will contribute to the country’s economic development. The goal of
Kazakhstan is to join the “club” of the 50 most developed economies in the world, a
goal holding potential for greater social investment in children and women. The
programme is aligned with efforts to increase the effectiveness of public sector
governance, investments in human capital and results-based management and
budgeting, as well as with long-term priorities in improving children’s education
and health. It will directly contribute to the following UNDAF 2010 -2015
Outcomes: (a) vulnerable groups enjoy improved social, economic and health status;
(b) State actors and civil society are more capable of and accountable for ensuring
the rights of vulnerable groups; and (c) communities and national and local
authorities use more effective mechanisms and partnerships for environmental
sustainability and for response to and recovery from natural disasters and other
crises.

7

Relationship to international priorities
27. The country programme is based on the norms and standards for children
embodied in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and will contribute to
sustaining the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and A World Fit
for Children goals. Based on the observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, it will provide technical inputs to assist the Government in defining and
allocating a more appropriate share of its resources for children, especially for both
boys and girls from disadvantaged groups.
Programme components
Social policy and alliances for children
28. The translation of legislation and policies into tangible changes in the lives of
children remains a challenge. Social sector expenditure and overall investment in
children is limited, relative to national income and capacities. Increased use of
evidence and a strengthened knowledge management system can support
policymaking and accountability for policy implementation. The public needs to
become more aware of trends in the status of children and their relation to the
realization of children’s rights, as well as the programmes benefiting children. One
aim is to increase children’s participation and voice in decision-making related to
issues that affect them, an effort that would also result in better use and
rationalization of resources. Likewise, efforts will be made to help the private sector
develop a culture of corporate social responsibility, especially in relation to
children.
29. The two key elements of this component are child-focused social policy and
knowledge management and alliances for children. This programme component
will assist the Government in monitoring child well-being and in social sector
reforms by enhancing policy review and budget utilizatio n, improving knowledge
management systems across sectors and expanding partnerships for children. As a
result: (a) budget processes will be more outcome -based to encourage the provision
of adequate government funding for implementation of social policies e qually
benefiting girls and boys from disadvantaged areas; (b) a growing number of the
staff of strategic planning departments, line Ministries and local administrations
(education, social protection, and health care) apply child well -being indicators and
evidence-based data in planning, implementing and budgeting according to the
Mid-Term Expenditure Framework; (c) local development strategies and action
plans are adopted; and (d) the public and private sectors work in partnership to
uphold and safeguard the rights of children and adolescents.
30. The programme supports the generation of evidence for making efficient
policy choices that benefit disadvantaged and vulnerable groups of children and
young people. This includes support to the analytical review o f related legislative
and key government public finance and social protection frameworks as they affect
children. Technical assistance will be made available to academic institutions by
tapping international expertise and sharing best practices, and facili tating learning
among countries in the region and globally. Models of excellence adopting results based management and budgeting will be piloted, using the local government
performance framework in selected regions, and best practices will be documented
for replication. Quality research, evidence-generation and data collection,
disaggregated by gender and location, will be supported to inform policies and

8

develop technical standards and regulations, such as for micronutrient
supplementation and food fortification. Such knowledge will also be used to
develop and implement strategies for preventing accidents and traumas,
emphasizing analysis linking the well-being of adolescent girls and boys to healthseeking behaviours. Such efforts will also be used to supp ort reform initiatives,
particularly in the child protection system. The programme partners include the
World Health Organization (WHO), UNFPA, United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Labour Organization (IL O),
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), World Bank, United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) and European Union (EU).
31. The programme will further support the establishment of public and private
sector alliances for children, including with and for adolescents. In this
collaboration, the private sector, civil society representatives and the Government
will be assisted in developing a “compact for children” that will contribute to
sustainable initiatives, the leveraging of resources and regular monitoring of
children’s rights. The compact will be regularly assessed and improved. The
alliances will create the basis for a transformed engagement between the
Government and UNICEF and will strive to sustain resource allocation for children
in the country beyond 2015. Efforts will also go towards stimulating the social
responsibility of the private and corporate sector, using key communication
strategies of informing, advocating, mobilizing and accelerating public awareness.
Efforts will be made to make the voices of adolescents and young people heard
through support for groups, organizations, programmes and initiatives promoting
civic engagement and participation.
32. The programme will be closely linked to national initiatives: the Kazakhstan
2030 Strategy; the 2020 Development Programme and the Concept of Transition of
the Republic of Kazakhstan to Sustainable Development for the Period 2007 -2024;
the health and education long-term development strategy for 2010-2020, which is
based on results-based management and budgeting; the Quality of Life for All; and
the Children of Kazakhstan national programme. These efforts will contribute to the
positioning of Kazakhstan as a centre of excellence for children.
33. Regular resources will be earmarked especially to establish the key blocks of
evidence generation to influence social policies for children and initiatives for
partnership expansion; other resources will be used to suppl ement and sustain this
effort.
Systems strengthening for a protective environment for children
34. The component will support the strengthening of the quality of health,
nutrition, education and child protection services. This effort will be linked with
support for more socially effective and equitable budgeting; better results monitoring, performance and training; and updated medical and social work
technologies and curricula. Gaps need to be addressed in responding to family
vulnerability and social exclusion; infants and children deprived of parental care and
with special needs; domestic and international adoptions; and exploitation and child
trafficking. In order to overcome these gaps, support will be given to the
development and implementation of new and flexible approaches, and for the
achievement of greater clarity in roles and accountabilities of service providers

9

within the child protection and juvenile justice systems. As many social indicators
point to serious deficiencies in young people’s well-being, behaviour and healthseeking patterns, the programme will emphasize renewed and integrated efforts in
adolescent development.
35. The programme aims to assist the Government in strengthening the social
sector system so that improvements are made in access, quality and effectiveness of
care and preventive and protection services for children, adolescents and women.
The two key elements of the programme are child and adolescent health and
development and child protection. These aim to achieve the following results: (a) a
comprehensive health system is in place enabling the holistic and integrated
delivery and monitoring results of MCH, ECD, life skills -based education and HIV
prevention and care services; (b) transformed and optimized childcare systems are
in place that rely on community-based social services, prevention of family
separation and various forms of family substitute care; and (c) the juvenile justice
system provides rights-based solutions to the situation and of each child in conflict
with the law, in accordance with the best interests of every child. Programme
partners include WHO, UNDP, UNESCO, UNFPA, ILO, UNAIDS, the World Bank,
USAID, the EU and the Organization for Security and Co -operation in Europe.
36. The programme will continue to assist the Government in improving and
monitoring the basic package of free health services for children and pregnant
women that is part of the health reform, emphasizing emergency obstetric and
newborn care services to reduce preventable perinatal mortality. Th e quality and
impact of training of front-line health workers on effective child survival
interventions, including essential newborn care, will be further assessed and
reviewed. Support will be provided to improve nutrition surveillance and growth monitoring systems covering children and women and to expand nutrition
interventions such as infant feeding practices, micronutrient supplementation and
food fortification. Advocacy measures to create an enabling environment for the
development and implementation of sustainable mother and child health and
nutrition policies will be promoted. The experience gained in life skills -based
education will be used to advocate for its mandatory introduction into the
curriculum, and teacher training methods will be improved and sustained, mainly
through pre-service training and linkage with the international network for life
skills-based education. On ECD, the programme will continue to support the
development and dissemination of messages on childcare, nutrition,
disability/accidents and hygiene messages, which will be based on the findings of a
comprehensive child-rearing study to be conducted. The messages will be tailored to
the various practices used in a country that has a rich cultural diversity. The main
partners will be WHO, UNFPA, UNESCO, USAID, the World Bank and the EU.
37. Regarding HIV/AIDS, better linkages will be forged with the health and
education sectors to promote healthy lifestyles, increase adolescents ’ awareness on
HIV/AIDS prevention, ensure proper care for children in need and mainstream the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and paediatric AIDS into MCH
services throughout the country. Stronger support will be provided to most -at-risk
adolescents through intensified peer-based community outreach, increased
utilization of HIV prevention services and youth-friendly health and psychosocial
services, as well as protection, psychological and education services for children
with HIV. The main partners will be the key UNAIDS cosponsor agencies an d the
network of non-governmental organizations delivering HIV-prevention services.

10

38. In child protection, the programme will collaborate with the Government to
further develop effective mechanisms, including data collection and coordinated
cross-sectoral systems of detection of, referral for and response to the physical,
psychological and social impact of violence, abuse, neglect, exploitation and
exclusion. It will enhance decision-making and the targeting of resources through
improved gender-disaggregated data collection and mapping of children not
currently reached. It will strengthen national knowledge on all forms of abuse,
exploitation and violence to highlight gaps in service provision; improve planning
and programme interventions; strengthen linkages among sectors; and establish
sound policies and a legal framework in line with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. There will be a particular focus on children in residential education and
care institutions and children in conflict with the law. This will require further
adjustments to the social work functions and legal framework to prevent family
separation and to develop and monitor community-based family-support services
and family substitute care. On juvenile justice, legal reforms based on international
standards will be promoted, and personnel involved in the administration of juvenile
justice will be trained on alternatives to custodial sentences, such as non -residential
probation measures, community services and rehabilitation services. T he main
partners will be the EU, ILO, UNDP and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe.
39. Regular resources will be used to bring in the best expertise and share
experiences and knowledge on international standards, provide cost -benefit analysis
and leverage more resources for the effective functioning of systems. Other
resources will be used for micronutrient supplementation and flour fortification and
for specific targeted interventions in the modelling of childcare and juvenile justic e
systems.
40. Cross-sectoral costs cover cross-sectoral staff salaries as well as travel and
training and will also include additional operational support for country office
management and administration.
Major partnerships
41. Partnership- and alliance-building are critical strategies. For high-level policy
initiatives at central level, the main partners are the Parliament; the Presidential
Administration; Ministries of Education, Health, Labour and Social Protection,
Justice, Interior, Emergency, and Economic Development and Finance; the
Ombudsman Office; the Supreme Court; the General Prosecutor ’s Office; and the
Agency on Statistics. At the subnational level, local governments are the main
partners. Partnership with the academic and research communi ties will be expanded
to share knowledge and develop tools and research. Through the alliances for
children, civil society and the private sector will be involved in child rights
monitoring.
42. Collaboration will continue with United Nations agencies in the achievement
of the established UNDAF and country programme outcomes for 2010 -2015. This
will include a joint UNDP/UNFPA/United Nations Volunteers/UNICEF project
targeting health, prevention of HIV/AIDS, protection and employment issues
regarding children, women and young people residing in the Semipalatinsk region
who are affected by former nuclear testing. UNICEF will also expand cooperation in

11

health system-strengthening with WHO, HIV/AIDS prevention with UNAIDS, and
ECD with UNESCO.
43. UNICEF will collaborate with the World Bank on a health reform project,
especially in the area of pharmaceutical policies linked to antiretroviral supply and
the quality of MCH. Collaboration with USAID will take place on HIV and AIDS
services.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
44. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will coordinate the country programme;
relevant line Ministries and departments will handle implementation and
management.
45. The key indicators will cover the following areas: budget allocations for
priority services benefiting children; infant, child and maternal mortality; the
percentage of health facilities providing quality perinatal care and the percentage of
mothers using them; micronutrient supplementation coverage and incidence of
vitamin A deficiency; the percentage of reproductive-age women consuming flour
fortified with iron and folic acid; the percentage of women who are HIV positive
receiving antiretroviral drugs; the percentage of most -at-risk adolescents utilizing
HIV prevention services; the proportion of children in alternative care; and the
number of children in conflict with the law placed in alternatives to detention.
Monitoring will take place on achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
especially those directly affecting children, the goals of A World Fit for Children;
and on other international and national commitments. A user-friendly DevInfo will
be utilized to increase access to child-related information and to facilitate use of
“Quality of Life for Children” methodology for tracking child well-being, as well as
gender and social disparities.
46. Major research studies and evaluations are identified in a six-year Integrated
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. These cover, among other issues, budgetary
provisions for essential services for children; quality and use of MCH and youthfriendly services; and quality and use of alternative care for children. Continuing
technical assistance will be provided for a Government-initiated Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey.
47. Regular monitoring activities and periodic programme reviews will be
undertaken, culminating in joint annual reviews and the midterm review, which will
be linked to the UNDAF.

12

