Kyrgyzstan
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Kyrgyzstan
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.2) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (% moderate and severe, 2005-2006)
(% urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)

2
37
2a
2/2, 2/2
55 b
91/93 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

98

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

90

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

93

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years)
(% male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

0.3 d
4
94
95/94, 96/93, 94/95
870

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

95

One-year-olds immunized with measles (%)

99

†
a
b

c
d

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org.
Stunting (moderate and severe, 2006) = 18 per cent.
81 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.
The estimated number of women (aged 15+) living with HIV (2009 estimate) is 28,000. The
estimated number of children (aged 0-17) orphaned due to all causes (2009 estimate) is
140,000.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Kyrgyzstan remains the second poorest country in the Central and Eastern
Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States region. Despite significant
decreases in poverty between 2003 and 2008 — overall poverty declined from 64 to
31.7 per cent and extreme poverty from 28 to 6.1 per cent — one in five children is
still poor, and three quarters of child poverty occurs in rural areas. Recent declines
in poverty levels resulted largely from massive migration from poverty -stricken
rural areas to cities and to the Russian Federation and Kazakhstan. In 2008,
Kyrgyzstan was the fourth most remittance-dependent country in the world. 1
2.
The effects of the global economic crisis in 2009 (including sharp reductions
in exports, and a 15 per cent fall in remittances), as well as the instability of 2010,
will have lasting impacts on vulnerable groups, including women and children. By
mid-2010 the budget deficit had risen above 10 per cent, and national debt was
growing. These major economic and financial challenges are likely to reduce social
spending and delay important reforms in key sectors.
__________________
1

2

International Monetary Fund.

3.
In June 2010, violent inter-ethnic clashes in southern Kyrgyzstan resulted in at
least 415 deaths and large-scale property destruction. 2 Approximately 400,000
children were affected. Many fled their homes, while others suffered psychological
damage and interruption of schooling. The conflict, which followed the violent
overthrow of the former president in April 2010, continues the recent series of shocks
that threaten to reverse positive trends in social spending and poverty reduction.
4.
Despite recent progress in service provision, 38 children out of 1,000 die
before reaching the age of 5. Maternal mortality is still unacceptably high, at
69.1 deaths per 100,000 live births, indicating inadequate quality of care for women
during pregnancy, labour, delivery and the post-partum period. Seventy per cent of
maternal deaths are preventable. Maternal mortality is 1.5 to 2 times higher in
district hospitals and remote mountainous areas. Staff shortages, limited specialized
assistance and poor access are the main reasons for these deat hs. Underlying reasons
for high maternal and infant mortality include the poor nutrition of mothers, late
access to antenatal care during pregnancy and chronic poverty.
5.
HIV and AIDS is another area of concern. Newly registered cases have
increased by 25 per cent annually over the last decade, making it unlikely that the
country will meet the target for Millennium Development Goal 6. 3 Rates of
narcotics dependency and HIV infection are high in the city of Osh, which is located
along major drug-trafficking routes. 4 In recent years, over 100 young children were
infected with HIV in medical facilities in Osh. Women and children diagnosed with
HIV suffer wide-ranging stigma and discrimination.
6.
Young children suffer from stunting, low birth weight and micronutrient
deficiencies. Over 4.5 per cent of children nationwide are underweight, 5 more than
1.5 times higher than the Millennium Development Goal 1 target. Malnutrition is
an underlying cause of 60 per cent of deaths among children under 5
Undernutrition constitutes 22 per cent of all under-five deaths, approximately
1,547 deaths annually, including neonatal deaths 6.. Iodine deficiency is
widespread.
7.
The burden of parasitic worms is 50 per cent or more among the general
population and 75 per cent among school-aged children. 7 Causes include limited
access to safe drinking water, inadequate sanitation facilities and poor hygiene
practices. According to the 2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 11.8 per cent of
the population had no access to clean drinking water, and access was poorer in
remote and mountainous areas. No district hospital had access to hot running water.
__________________

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Kyrgyzstan: Extended and
Revised Flash Appeal — June 2010 to June 2011.
3 Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Fact Sheet: Eastern Europe and
Central Asia, 23 November 2010, at <www.unaids.org/documents/20101123_FS_eeca_em_en.pdf>.
4 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Illicit Drug Trends in Central Asia, 2008, at
<www.unodc.org/documents/regional/central-asia/Illicit%20Drug%20Trends_Central%20Asiafinal.pdf>.
5 The Kyrgyz Republic second progress report on the Millennium Development Goals, Bishkek,
2010. Also available at <www.undp.kg/tmp/rc/MDG%20report.pdf>.
6 Situation Analysis, Improving economic outcomes by expanding nutrition programming in the
Kyrgyz Republic, (version for launch on 30 June 2011), The World Bank and UNICEF, June 2011
7 Peter Steinmann, Epidemiological Survey on Human Intestinal Helminths — Results,
implications and policy recommendations, UNICEF, April 2009.
2

8.
Although Kyrgyzstan is close to achieving Millennium Development Goal 2
(universal primary education for both boys and girls), the net enrolment ratio was
84 per cent in 2007. 8 Despite substantial public expenditure on education, learning
achievements are of great concern. Testing under the 2009 Programme for
International Student Achievement (PISA) ranked Kyrgyzstan last out of 65 countri es.
It showed no improvement from 2006, when the country was last out of 57 countries.
Teacher quality is one of the main factors affecting the quality of education. A
UNICEF-supported study in 2009 involving the Ministries of Health and of
Education and Science revealed a 23 per cent shortage of trained teachers
nationwide. 9 Only 12 per cent of children in the age cohort attend preschool. This is
because coverage remains limited around the country, despite recent government
and donor efforts to promote community-based kindergartens. Rural and southern
Kyrgyzstan have particularly low preschool attendance rates. 10
9.
Eleven thousand children live in 120 residential institutions in Kyrgyzstan. 11
Only 2.4 per cent are orphans; many were abandoned because of pove rty. In
southern Kyrgyzstan, the number of children in institutions has risen by 10 per cent
since the June 2010 violence. Problems in institutions include poor record -keeping,
underutilized staff, psychological violence and limited educational opportuniti es.
Little is done at community level to prevent institutionalization.
10. Lack of access to birth registration for children who are without homes,
stateless 12 or who come from unregistered migrant families leaves many children
without proper identification, hindering their access to social services. Violence and
abuse against children are widespread within families, with 72.7 per cent of children
reporting abuse and neglect. 13

Key results and lessons learned from previous collaboration
2005-2011
Key results achieved
11. As part of the Ministry of Health programme to improve mother and child
nutrition, a UNICEF-supported project provides Gulazyk (Sprinkles micronutrient
powder) to reduce iron-deficiency anaemia. Sprinkles was given to 24,500 children
aged 6 to 24 months in Talas province, which is around 10 per cent of this age group
in the country. Anaemia rates fell by 25 per cent. The project also promoted the
dissemination of key messages on early childhood development in support of the
cognitive development of young children. Based on this unprecedented success,
__________________
8

9

10

11

12

13

4

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Education for All Global
Monitoring Report, 2010.
UNICEF, Survival Strategies of Schools in the Kyrgyz Republic: A school -level analysis of
teacher shortages, 2009.
Farida Ryskulueva, Draft Situation Analysis Review of Education Sector in Kyrgyzstan , UNICEF,
25 October 2010.
Nurjan Musaeva, Children in State Care: Tendencies and problems, presentation made on
24 January 2011, Bishkek.
According to figures of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, there
were 24,615 stateless persons in Kyrgyzstan in January 2010. Of these, the majority were ethnic
Kyrgyz, but a significant proportion were ethnic Uzbeks from Uzbekistan who had entered into
unregistered marriages in Kyrgyzstan.
UNICEF, Child Abuse and Neglect in Families in the Kyrgyz Republic, 2010.

funding has been secured to scale up this project across the country. The project has
been implemented in close partnership with the Swiss Red Cross, United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Ministry of Health.
12. An additional 6,000 children are benefiting from social assistance as a result of
the new Law on State Social Benefits. This law was developed and implemented
with UNICEF support in close collaboration with the European Union (EU) and the
World Bank. New eligibility criteria created by the law allowed 3,600 more families
to receive benefits, an increase of 22 per cent.
13. A new Law on Preschool Education was adopted in 2009, representing a major
step forward for a compulsory-school readiness programme and universal access to
learning opportunities for preschool-age children. The law recognizes communitybased kindergartens as viable alternatives to the full day-care system, following the
success of the model piloted by UNICEF in one province.
14. To address the alarming increase of HIV among women and children, the
Ministry of Health has initiated the development of the first -ever national
programme for prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) and paediatric
AIDS, and modelled its integration into general medical services. This is recognized
as global good practice and is now being scaled up. Currently, all children infected
with HIV benefit from improved paediatric AIDS treatment and monitoring, and
54 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women received antiretroviral medication to
prevent mother-to-child transmission in 2009. UNICEF supported the development
and implementation of the strategy, especially through technical expertise and the
sharing of global experience and knowledge.
15. The rapid response of UNICEF to the humanitarian needs in the south
following the 2010 violence contributed to the restoration of health services and
ensured widespread access to school, safe water and sanitation. Child -friendly
spaces were established, providing psychosocial support to around 6,000 children.
UNICEF led the “Welcome to School” campaign in 277 schools, revised the
curriculum to introduce peace education, and continues to provide “safe movement”
to and from school for children at risk of violence.
Lessons learned
16. The World Bank global evaluation conducted in five countries in 2009
highlighted the Kyrgyzstan experience in implementing a sector-wide approach
(SWAp) in the health sector as being among the most successful worldwide. The
SWAp 2010 Joint Annual Review highlighted the strategic role of UNICEF in the
process, especially through the integration of maternal and child health as a priority
in sector reform; successful advocacy for allocation of funds to maternal and child
health; the training of over 75 per cent of maternity staff on effective perinatal and
neonatal care and resuscitation; and equipping 62 maternity wards with basic
lifesaving equipment. Experiences from implementing the health S WAp will be
applied to the planned SWAp in education.
17. A 2009 study by the Ministry of Education and Science, supported by
UNICEF, the World Bank and the Aga Khan Foundation, showed that high rates of
teacher turnover and the quality of education require close monitoring to make
community-based kindergartens more sustainable. The study revealed that about
4 per cent of school-age children (approximately 35,000) are not attending school or

not attending regularly, and 30,000 leave school after basic eleme ntary education.
The results of the 2009 PISA confirmed the decline in learning achievement. This
raises concerns about the effectiveness of government policies and donor support.
UNICEF will support implementation of the Education Strategy 2012 -2020. The
strategy aims to improve the quality of education and management of financial and
human resources, in coordination with other donors and partners.
18. The inter-ethnic clashes of June 2010 and subsequent inter-agency rapid needs
assessments (on health and nutrition, education, child protection and water and
sanitation) revealed a number of pressing issues. These included a shortage of
appropriate child care facilities; weakened education, child and social protection
systems; and poor water, sanitation and hygiene facilities in schools and health
centres. While the immediate humanitarian response to the events was effective,
new information led to further research in peacebuilding and the role of adolescents.
It points to the need for an increased, long-term presence of UNICEF at the local
level in the south to consolidate achievements and ensure that these issues are
properly addressed for lasting results. Emergency interventions will be
mainstreamed and consolidated to address outstanding needs, including in the areas
of peacebuilding, conflict prevention and disaster risk reduction.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Equitable, quality and responsive systems for
children

1 450

5 844

7 294

Increased access to quality social services

1 313

9 506

10 819

Adolescent and youth civic engagement and
partnerships for child rights
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

471

4 985

5 456

1 366

4 665

6 031

4 600

25 000

29 600

Preparation process
19. Programme preparation was based on the 2008 midterm review, the 2012 -2015
midterm programme of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, and the 2010
United Nations country analysis report, complemented by the 2010 UNICEF
Situation Analysis. The process was managed in parallel with preparation of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and is fully in line
with its outcomes. The CPD is also informed by the 2009 United Nations country
team Gender Mainstreaming Strategy and the concluding observations of the 2010
Universal Periodic Review.
20. The country team decision to proceed with UNDAF and CPD preparation was
taken after consultations with the President of Kyrgyzstan. UNICEF held severa l
planning meetings with line ministries and non-governmental organization (NGO)

6

partners and donors, ensuring that the CPD complements other initiatives and
partnerships to support government priorities.
Programme component results and strategies
21. The overall goal is to support government and civil society efforts to increase
equity and the social inclusion of children who need protection, who live in poverty
and who are at risk of ethnic violence, so that they can exercise their rights. The
proposed programme of cooperation addresses the three key development challenges
for the realization of child rights in Kyrgyzstan: poverty, social exclusion and
vulnerability, and chronic system weaknesses.
22. The key results of the programme by end of 2016 are: (a) at national level, more
children and women have increased access to quality response services, including
social benefits; (b) Kyrgyzstan makes significant progress in implementing key
components of international treaties, including the Convention on t he Rights of the
Child; (c) with a focus on the most vulnerable groups in specific targeted areas,
more women, girls and boys have access to and use a continuum of integrated social
services, including sanitation services; and (d) an alliance consisting of the
Government, NGOs and communities contributes to increasing the civic engagement
of youth and partnerships for child rights.
23. The programme will contribute to (a) an increase in the number of women and
children from poor and vulnerable families who have access to priority lifesaving
health services, including those of nutrition; (b) effective implementation and
monitoring of local plans for children by municipalities in the selected areas; (c) an
increase in the proportion of children benefiting from preschool services in the
targeted municipalities; and (d) a decrease in the number of boys and girls living in
institutions per 100,000 child population. These results will be achieved by
supporting national and local authorities in the selected areas to facilitate a secure
enabling environment for the active civic engagement of youth and adolescents for
economic development, peacebuilding and social inclusion.
24. The programme will use a range of strategies, including advocacy for children,
building institutional capacities and use of evidence-based data to inform policy.
Capacity for modelling and scaling up cost-effective interventions will be developed
to support the Government and civil society in efforts to improve equity and
inclusion for all boys and girls. The programme will prioritize partnerships,
including with United Nations agencies, to create synergies and leverage additional
resources for children, and ensure that child rights and gender concerns are
effectively addressed.
25. Efforts in support of gender mainstreaming will include development of
disaggregated data, analyses and monitoring. The programme will also address the
challenges of domestic violence and early marriage.
26. Support to ensure effective coordination mechanisms and conti ngency plans
for emergency preparedness and response will be provided through disaster risk
reduction strategies targeting schools.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The country programme has been developed in line with national pri orities in
the health SWAp, National Education Strategy 2012-2020, and Multi-Agency

National Action Plan for Child Protection. These priorities have guided the new
UNDAF, for which UNICEF leads the Social Inclusion and Equity pillar. The
programme focuses on increasing access to quality social services for vulnerable
groups. UNICEF will also contribute to the UNDAF pillar on Peace, Cohesion,
Effective Democratic Governance and Human Rights in the areas of peacebuilding,
strengthening independent institutions and enabling the participation and engagement
of civil society, adolescents and youth; and to Inclusive and Sustainable Growth for
Poverty Reduction and Disaster Risk Management for child poverty reduction
analysis and disaster risk reduction.
Relationship to international priorities
28. The programme is fully embedded in the Millennium Declaration, Millennium
Development Goals and UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013. It also
responds to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Convention o n the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Universal
Periodic Review recommendations. The programme will support national authorities
to work towards their Millennium Development Goal targets, particularly those on
decreasing child and maternal morbidity and mortality.
Programme components
29. The programme comprises three components: (a) equitable, quality and
responsive systems for children; (b) increased access to quality social services; and
(c) adolescent and youth civic engagement and partnerships for child rights. The
first two components will support national systems and local partners, respectively,
to ensure that reforms at the central level are effectively translated into increased
access to quality social services by the most vulnerable and marginalized women,
girls and boys. The third component will contribute to creating an enabling
environment for the realization of the rights of adolescents and children.
30. Equitable, quality and responsive systems for children. As noted above,
while State funding for the social sector has improved in recent years, social and
child protection systems remain weak and fragmented. Many vulnerable girls and
boys are excluded from adequate prevention and protection services. Accordin g to a
recent survey, 60 per cent of extremely poor people are excluded from social
assistance benefits. 14 This component will therefore support policy development,
standards, normative frameworks and budget formulation to improve the quality of
social services and bring them in line with international standards and norms.
31. Within health, the programme will ensure that more women and children from
poor and vulnerable families have access to quality, priority lifesaving health
services, including those for nutrition. The programme will continue to support the
Government in sector reform within the SWAp, in coordination with development
partners. UNICEF will advocate at the policy level to increase the focus on
vulnerable and hard-to-reach people and to ensure that State guarantees are met
fully and equitably. Support will also be provided to develop the capacity of the
Ministry of Health to manage mother and child health services, ensuring that
priority lifesaving health services and improved monitoring and evaluation systems
__________________
14

8

Assessment of Effectiveness of Cash Transfers to Families and Children in the Kyrgyz Republic,
2008, implemented by the Center for Social and Economic Research, commissioned by UNICEF.

are in place. The programme will also continue to support the integration of PMTCT
and paediatric AIDS issues into maternal and child health services. With the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the programme will suppo rt
national policies to increase access of women and children to effective diagnostic,
preventive and treatment interventions for HIV. The management of the immunization
system will be strengthened to provide safe immunization services for all children.
Collaboration will be enhanced with the World Health Organization, United Nations
Population Fund, World Bank and United States Agency for International
Development.
32. Anaemia and other micronutrient deficiencies among women and children will
be addressed through the development, implementation and monitoring of a National
Nutrition Strategy and enforcement of the law on flour fortification. The integrated
approach initiated in one province, which combines the distribution of Sprinkles
micronutrient powder to children with appropriate food practices and promotion of
early childhood development, will be strengthened and scaled up nationwide.
33. In education, the programme will ensure that more boys and girls have access
to quality and sustainable preschool and basic education. Within the framework of
the Ministry of Education and Science strategy for 2012 -2020, policy advice for
system reform will be provided, focusing on quality improvement, better preparation
for school, and reduction in dropout rates. The programme will focus on improving
education by emphasizing the quality and availability of teachers and supporting
reform regarding their status and working conditions. Legislation will be supported
to ensure equitable and expanded access to quality preschool education. To improve
the capacity of the Ministry to collect, analyse and use education data, particularly
on out-of-school children, technical assistance will be provided to set up a reliable
and independent education management information system, i ncluding for preschool
education. It will be developed in close collaboration with the EU and other donors.
The ongoing strategic partnership with key development partners will be strengthened
to leverage resources to improve equity in access to a high-quality learning
environment.
34. Ongoing collaboration will be enhanced with partners supporting education
quality, and particularly with those promoting per capita education financing and
school network rationalization. These partners include in particular the World Bank,
United States Agency for International Development and EU. The programme will
also assist in preparing and using quality assurance and monitoring frameworks for
early education, including the application of Early Learning Development Standa rds.
Peace education and disaster risk reduction will be promoted in the curriculum.
35. Regarding child protection, the expected result is that national and local
authorities respond effectively to cases of violence and abuse, ensure rights to birth
registration and prevent separation of children from their families. Reform of the
child welfare system will be supported through policy and legislation to provide
prevention and protection services through a well-functioning referral and response
mechanism. A legal framework integrating child protection and social protection
systems will be developed, along with State policy tools. These will include
standards for child-sensitive, equitable social services, including prevention of child
abandonment and gender-based violence. The programme will continue working to
introduce a juvenile justice system in line with international standards.

36. In the area of social policy, the programme will increase access of poor and
vulnerable families to equitable social benefits and effective prevention and
response policies, programmes and services. UNICEF, along with the EU, World
Bank and German Agency for Technical Cooperation, will be part of the
Government’s initiative to elaborate a child-sensitive Social Protection Reform
Strategy, 2011-2013, linked to employment and human development programmes.
The strategy aims at reducing child poverty by reforming the design of the cash
transfer system to provide categorical benefits to children. For this, key social and
economic policy decision makers will use a regularly updated child poverty profile,
child well-being index and poverty rates. UNICEF will enhance the capacity of
decision makers in policy formulation and monitoring and analysis of public
expenditures as a way of identifying “fiscal space” for progressive reforms.
37. Increased access to quality social services. Priority will be given to addressing
inequities among poor children and women living in 23 poor urban, rural and remote
municipalities. The goal is to increase access to quality basic services, including
health, education, social and child protection, water and sanitation, and youth services.
38. The programme will ensure that selected municipalities coordinate
implementation and monitoring of local plans for children and translate national
policies and laws into concrete outcomes for children and women. Innovative
approaches and cost-effective field interventions will be promoted for further
scaling up in coordination with the national Government. Capacity develo pment will
enable district and local authorities to design and implement a continuum of
integrated social services for the most excluded children, adolescents and women
and to close gaps in access to and use of quality services.
39. With a focus on the most vulnerable groups, the programme will aim to ensure
an increase of at least 25 per cent of women and children using priority lifesaving
health services in the selected municipalities. Local authorities and communities
will be supported to actively promote maternal and child health home-visiting
services and outreach programmes to address child and maternal mortality. The
network of healthy lifestyle centres working closely with village health committees
will be strengthened to achieve sustainable outcomes. Water-borne and sanitationrelated diseases will be addressed by increasing access to safe water and adequate
sanitation in schools and primary health care centres and by promoting behaviour
change among schoolchildren, women and families, including the adoption of good
hygiene practices.
40. The programme will seek to raise by least 30 per cent the number of children
benefiting from preschool services in targeted municipalities. It will promote
community-based kindergarten models, including by strengthening capacities of local
authorities and communities to open and sustain community-based kindergartens.
41. In cooperation with civil society organizations, local authorities will be
supported to increase demand for quality social services for women and c hildren,
including by protecting children at risk of being separated from their families and
placed in institutions. Communication for development will be used as a cross cutting strategy to promote positive social and behavioural outcomes among
communities, including those on improved parenting, inclusive peace and tolerance.
42. In 13 targeted municipalities in the south, local authorities and communities
will be supported to promote safe and tolerant schools through a peace education

10

programme. Youth services will create opportunities for young people from different
ethnic communities to gather and interact. The aim will be to empower youth to
participate in peacebuilding, reconciliation and conflict prevention and decision making, and to provide them with skills and opportunities to better their lives.
Successful initiatives will be promoted for further scale -up.
43. In view of the frequency of natural disasters, the capacity of local authorities
will be strengthened for emergency preparedness and response and in disaster risk
reduction.
44. Adolescent and youth civic engagement and partnerships for child rights.
Based upon the specific situation of adolescents and youth and the role they played
in the 2010 events, the programme will support the development of national
capacities to promote civic engagement and participation of adolescents in activities
promoting social cohesion, peacebuilding and reconciliation, while increasing their
access to social services and opportunities.
45. This will be achieved by ensuring that national and local authorities in the
targeted areas facilitate a secure enabling environment for the active civic
engagement of youth. The Ministry of Youth and youth organizations will be
supported to improve planning, implementation and coordination of youth services
and to strengthen the participation of youth in decision -making processes affecting
their lives. Youth leaders and volunteers will be mobilized to engage with vulnerable
youth in poor and rural areas. Continued advocacy with decision makers and
policymakers will be pursued through visits between youth and decision makers,
promotion of inter-generational dialogue and collaboration with community-based
and faith-based organizations.
46. The programme will ensure that alliances for children are formed that include
the Government, Parliament, the private sector, civil society and the media to
support programme results. This includes increasing access for children to quality
social services and leveraging resources for children. Innovative approaches with
the media will be pursued to give opportunities for children and young people to voice
their opinions. A particular emphasis will be given to increasing equitable access to
information, especially for disadvantaged and deprived groups. Collaboration with
national and local television and radio will be sought to increase broadcast time and
organize special programmes for youth, especially in multi-ethnic communities.
Partnerships will be facilitated with the use of Internet resources and social media,
as well as through community-based networking.
47. Finally, the programme will enhance national capacity in monitoring and
evaluation to inform evidence-based policymaking and budgeting around adolescent
and child issues, including child poverty. This component will support the
production of annual disaggregated data, including on gender equality. The existing
Office of the Ombudsman of the Kyrgyz Republic, a children’s ombudsman
institution, will monitor the situation of children and prod uce accurate and timely
reports on child rights. The child well-being index will help to track the situation of
children and adolescents and provide important information to help monitor
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.

Cross-sectoral costs
48. Cross-sectoral costs cover salaries of cross-cutting staff, travel, training and
equipment, as well as additional operational support to country office management
and administration.
Major partnerships
49. The programme will work with key counterpart ministries, including the
Ministries of Health; Education and Science; Social Protection; Youth; Labour,
Employment and Migration; Emergency Situations; Justice; Economic Regulation;
and Agriculture. Other national partners include the Supreme Co urt, National
Statistical Committee and Public Television and Radio Corporation. Activities at
municipal level will be coordinated through local governments, State Agency of
Local Self-Government, line ministries and local NGOs. The programme will also
collaborate with parliamentary social committees on children’s and adolescents’
issues, including on budgetary allocations. UNICEF will collaborate with local and
international research institutions to support knowledge generation and with media
and universities to implement a child rights syllabus for journalists.
50. UNICEF is partnering with the EU in the social protection and education
sectors. In education, UNICEF is working closely with the World Bank, including to
implement grants under the Education for All Fast Track Initiative. Finally, UNICEF
will continue to be an active member of the United Nations country team and the
Humanitarian Country Team and a participant in key activities involving the United
Nations. UNICEF will collaborate on the EU Good Governance and Social Justice
co-funded project, which involves UNICEF; the United Nations Development
Programme; United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; and
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Wom en
(UN-Women).
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
51. Implementation of the current cooperation arrangement will be monitored
through joint annual reviews as well as a midterm review of progress in 2014. An
evaluation of the UNICEF response to the 2010 emergency and lessons learned will
be conducted. The following key indicators disaggregated by geographic location,
sex and socio-economic conditions will be monitored: preschool attendance and
school dropout rates; quality of education; mother and child health; adoption and
implementation of normative frameworks in social protection and child protection,
including juvenile justice; and capacities and conditions for evidence -based
planning, policy development and budgeting.
52. A situation analysis will be developed in 2015 using new data generated by the
Demographic and Health Survey, Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and other
surveys. The programme will continue supporting national DevInfo and TransMONEE
to improve monitoring and the production and dissemination of the child well-being
index, which will be reviewed to improve its focus on equity. A secondary data
analysis of the status of children and those living in poverty will be undertaken on
the basis of the household survey data.

12

