Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Country programme document
2012-2015

The draft country programme document for Lao People’s
Democratic Republic (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.5) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 annual
session (20-23 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.8

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

59

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)

31
20/34, 38/14

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported, 2005)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

410 a
84/81

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

67

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

57

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

53

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.2

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)

11

Birth registration (% children under 5 years, 2006)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

72
72/71, 84/68, 62/85

GNI per capita (US$)

880

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

57

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

59

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
580 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the United Nations
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World
Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
With a total population of 6.1 million people, 45.9 per cent of whom are under
the age of 18, Lao People’s Democratic Republic has one of the youngest
populations in Southeast Asia. Eighty per cent of the population lives in rural areas
characterized by poor infrastructure and subsistence farming. The multi-ethnic
country has 49 distinct ethnic groups, many of whom live in remote mountainous
areas.
2.
The Seventh National Socio-Economic Development Plan (2011-2015) aims to
accelerate achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. There are increasing
opportunities to generate much-needed development revenue (mainly from the
commercial exploitation of natural resources) but also increasing risks, especially
for vulnerable populations that depend on the same natural resour ces for their
livelihoods. The Plan addresses critical social issues, including child nutrition, child
protection, sexual exploitation, trafficking, and the elimination of discrimination
against women, and violence against women and children.
3.
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
achievement of Millennium Development
targets are disaggregated by geographic
quintiles, stark inequities are observed.

2

is making good progress towards the
Goals overall; however, when data on
location, ethnicity, gender and wealth
The UNICEF Child Well-being and

Disparities Study (2010) showed that over 50 per cent of all Lao children experience
multiple and overlapping deprivations in terms of adequate sanitation, health,
housing, water supply and nutrition. Deprivation is most acut e in non-Lao Thai
ethnic communities living in areas that are rural, hilly, off-road, remote and
contaminated with unexploded ordnance.
4.
Progress on poverty and hunger (Millennium Development Goal 1) is on track.
Between 2001 and 2008, the poverty incidence declined from 34 per cent to 28 per
cent. Despite an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 7.2 per cent
over the last five years, a large proportion of the population continues to live just
above the poverty line. There has been almost no change in the rate of stunting of
children since 2000, which remains at 40.4 per cent of children under five years old.
Some 40.9 per cent of children 6-59 months of age are anaemic. In 2010, the
prevalence of acute malnutrition (wasting) reached a critical level of 18.9 per cent in
the most southerly province.
5.
However, universal primary education (Goal 2) and gender equality and
women’s empowerment (Goal 3) are off track. Although girls’ enrolment increased
from 76 per cent in 2001 to 92 per cent in 2009, there are significant disparities
between poor and non-poor districts, urban and rural areas, and girls and boys. The
enrolment rate for lower secondary school is 60 per cent, and 34 per cent for upper
secondary, but the low quality of education remains a concern. Nearly half of
primary schools do not offer the full five grades, especially in remote areas and
among non-Lao Thai ethnic groups. This is a major reason for high dropout rates.
Only 22 per cent of children benefit from preschool education, with the rate for the
richest twice as high as that for the poorest.
6.
Progress on child mortality (Goal 4) is on track, with national level data
showing a decline from 107 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2000 to 98 deaths per
1,000 live births in 2005; neonatal deaths account for one third of this rate. Large
disparities exist: some districts have child mortality rates three times the national
average. Maternal mortality (Goal 5) is off track, showing only marginal decline
since 2000. The 2005 census showed maternal mortality as being 405 deaths per
100,000 live births — the highest in the region. Skilled birth personnel attend only
20 per cent of all deliveries, and only 35 per cent of pregnant women benefit from
antenatal care. This is due to a shortage of skilled personnel, weak health systems,
and financial barriers. Family knowledge of key practices related to health, nutrition
and hygiene is also limited.
7.
Progress on HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (Goal 6) is on track. Lao
People’s Democratic Republic has a low prevalence rate for HIV: 0.2 per cent. The
country is committed to achieving the virtual elimination of paediatric AIDS by
2015, and services for the prevention of parent-to-child transmission of HIV are
being integrated into the routine health services. National data as of 2009 show that
189 children under 15 had been infected.
8.
Although progress on environmental sustainability and access to safe drinking
water (Goal 7) is on track, sanitation remains a major challenge. Access to wa ter
from improved sources increased nationally from 54 per cent in 2005 to 57 per cent
in 2008, such that the Goal 7 target was achieved. Approximately 72 per cent of
families in urban areas enjoy water from improved sources, while the rate is 51 per
cent in rural areas. The urban-rural disparity in access to sanitation facilities is even
starker, with rates of 98 per cent and 8 per cent, respectively. Open defecation is

3

common practice and hygiene practices are extremely poor. Currently, only 29 per
cent of schools have water and sanitation facilities.
9.
Children’s risk of abuse, exploitation, violence, neglect and discrimination is
exacerbated by the breakdown of families due to increasing migration and
urbanization, and the continuing lack of protection services. The lack of a national
strategy and policy and inadequate coordination and monitoring among concerned
ministries continue to hinder progress in this area. The Ministry of Labour and
Social Welfare has made the development of a national system of social welfare a
priority. The challenge posed by unexploded ordnance led the Government to make
this a ninth national Millennium Development Goal.
10. Lao People’s Democratic Republic reviewed its second periodic report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child in January 2011. Concluding Observations
noted the need to address the following areas: low and uneven access to primary
health care, nutrition and education services; low exclusive breastfeeding rates; the
lack of quantitative and qualitative data and; and low social sector budget
allocations. The 2009 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women highlighted several areas: the lack of
disaggregated data relating to ethnic groups; a concern about gend er-based violence;
and the vulnerability of women and girls to exploitation, violence and trafficking.
11. Lao People’s Democratic Republic is vulnerable to seasonal, extreme climatic
events. The main ones are annual river floods, flash floods and landslid es, rodent
infestation and related animal and human epidemics. Such events have had an
impact on rural households that are dependent on natural resources for their income
and food security. A lack of awareness about disaster risk, an absence of systematic
contingency planning, and a lack of resources and coordination all contribute to the
challenges.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2010
Key results achieved
12. There was a stronger enabling environment for childre n’s rights across all
programme areas. Of note were the following results:
(a) New or improved legislation, policies and strategies such as the Law on
the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Children (2007); the amended
Education Law (2007) and Education Sector Development Framework 2009-2015;
and policy developments in juvenile justice, trafficking and unexploded ordnance;
(b) Improved awareness and understanding of the situation of children and
their rights. For example, the UNICEF-supported Child Well-being and Disparities
Study (2010) focused attention on the overlapping multi -dimensional aspects of
child poverty. UNICEF also provided technical support to the Government to help
ensure that the Seventh National Socio-Economic Development Plan (2011-2015)
included a focus on child and social protection;
(c) Strengthened upstream coherence from the support of UNICEF to sector
working groups. This included support to the Ministry of Education ’s leadership of
the Education Sector Working Group as co-chair; the establishment of a water,

4

sanitation and hygiene (WASH) sector coordination mechanism; support to the
Centre for Information and Education on Health, and work as lead development
partner for behaviour change within the technical working groups on maternal and
neonatal child healthcare (MNCH) and nutrition; and support to the informal child
protection working group;
(d) Strengthened sector partnership for children: UNICEF supported the
development of a comprehensive MNCH package, including preve ntion of motherto-child transmission of HIV, a national nutrition policy, and a comprehensive
multi-year plan on immunization (2007-2011).
Lessons learned
13. The midterm review of the country programme in 2009 and the Mid -Year
Review and Annual Reviews of 2010 contributed to the following lessons learned:
(a) The country programme is on track towards most of its expected results,
particularly in supporting the Government to develop child -focused national
legislation, policies and action plans. However, implementation is hindered by
limited human and financial capacity among government partners and a lack of data
in almost all sectors. Data are insufficient, unreliable, and inadequately
disaggregated, thereby impacting the capacity of sectors to address disparities and
national capacity for strong evidence-based research and advocacy;
(b) The country programme played an increasing role within sector-wide
approaches, demonstrating the criticalness of supporting the Government to promote
sector coherence. Of note is the role of UNICEF in education, where the
organization contributed to national sector coordination and the aid effectiveness
agenda;
(c) Strong political leadership influences the achievement of key planned
results; therefore, engagement with decision makers at all levels is essential. For
example, the measles campaign achieved 95 per cent coverage after the Deputy
Prime Minister issued an order that all administrative bodies should contribute to
achieving this goal;
(d) The need for an increased focus on Communication for Development
across all programmes is key to the achievement of objectives, particularly for
health, nutrition and WASH.

5

The country programme, 2012-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Communication

1 115

5 500

6 615

Education

1 540

10 600

12 140

Health and nutrition

1 560

11 910

13 470

Child protection

855

6 090

6 945

Water, sanitation and hygiene

610

8 500

9 110

Social policy

708

6 000

6 708

1 472

3 088

4 560

7 860

51 688

59 548

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
14. The National Commission for Mothers and Children (NCMC) led the midterm
review process and the preparation of the country programme, e ngaging all
government and development partners. The process coincided with the Round Table
Consultation on National Priorities and the formulation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), 2012-2015, contributing to the
alignment of results. The preparation process built on a solid base of evidence,
including a situation analysis led by NCMC and UNICEF and reviews of
Communication for Development (2009) and Capacity Development (2009). The
Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women were fully taken
into account.
Programme and component results and strategies
15. The country programme will advance children’s rights by building and
strengthening government systems and institutional capacity to deliver quality social
services to the most disadvantaged populations. The programme will demonstrate
and document innovative approaches, contributing to national and organizational
learning, and will have the potential to be expanded nationally. As Lao People ’s
Democratic Republic has been identified as a Delivering as One country, the country
programme has been developed in close coordination with the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the World Food Programme (WFP). The country programme will pursue the
strategies described below:
(a) Strengthening national capacity to lead, coordinate and monitor sector
development in line with the 2006 Vientiane Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and
Country Action Plan. As the United Nations organizations co -chair the majority of
the sector working groups, there is potential for UNICEF, in partnership with the
others, to strengthen national policies and systems that will actively contribute to
the national aid effectiveness agenda;

6

(b) Strengthening the policy, legal and regulatory environment by sharing
in-depth operational experience and good practices; applying lessons from
innovative programming; advocating for appropriate budget allocations; mobilizing
and coordinating multinational expertise in numerous sectors; and facilitating
South-South cooperation. In addition to providing policy support for each
programme component, UNICEF will play a prominent rol e in policy advocacy on
gender, governance, decentralization, social protection and social budgeting at the
national level;
(c) Strengthening national and subnational planning and data systems
emphasizing the use of disaggregated data. This includes: demo nstrating different
ways to analyse data to identify multiple deprivations, including gender inequality;
strengthening institutional capacity to address equity and the improved targeting of
interventions; working actively eliminating the bottlenecks in the delivery of key
services; and promoting social inclusion;
(d) Strengthening the capacity of communities, families and caregivers to
practice behaviour that ensures that all children reach their social, emotional and
physical potential. This includes a focus on building the capacity of the most
disadvantaged children and women to claim their right to quality social services;
(e) Building strategic partnerships that focus on collaboration with an
expanded network of partners. UNICEF will do this by actin g as a convener among
ministries, development partners and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
by being a catalyst for child-sensitive policies and an increase in resources for
children;
(f) Improving geographical targeting of programme components results to
enhance impact at the local level. The programme will focus support in areas where
the comparative advantages of UNICEF will complement the support of other
United Nations agencies, donor partners and international NGOs. One province will
be selected as a “learning zone” to demonstrate the added value of collaboration and
track the optimal combination of high-impact Early Childhood Care and
Development programme interventions. The learning zone will also explore the best
way to support decentralization and increase the accountability of local leaders to
address equity and the meaningful participation of women and young people in
decision-making processes;
(g) Integrating human rights, gender equality, youth participation,
environmental sustainability, including climate change adaptation, disaster risk
reduction and emergency preparedness across the programme, in line with
international commitments. UNICEF will continue delivering upon its commitments
to the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and leadership roles in emergencies,
coordinating clusters at country level.
16. Regular (core) resources will be used for advocacy, core capacity development,
assuring the fulfilment of critical UNICEF staff functions and strengthening sector
partnerships. Other resources will support capacity development, operational
research and extended staff deployment.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
17. The country programme is fully aligned with the National Socio -Economic
Development Plan (2011-2015), and with all relevant sector plans and major

7

national reform programmes. The UNDAF covers 2012 -2015 to harmonize with the
Plan. The United Nations will develop a Joint UNDAF Action Plan promoting
Delivering as One, allowing UNICEF to build on its experie nce in an increasing
number of joint programmes. These include the Integrated Management of Acute
Malnutrition; REACH: Ending Child Hunger and Under Nutrition Partnership; the
implementation of the MNCH package; and Supporting an Effective Lao National
Assembly.
18. The country programme reflects the contribution of UNICEF to all of the five
UNDAF Strategic Priority Results (Inclusive Economic Growth, Natural Resource
Management, Governance, Unexploded Ordnance and Investing in Human
Development), with priority support given to the latter. UNICEF will actively
support the integration of unexploded ordnance issues into education, health and
social welfare systems.
Relationship to international priorities
19. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, as well as the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination against Women and other human rights treaties. The
objectives and strategic approaches are consistent with the Millennium Declaration
and Millennium Development Goals and with the Government ’s commitment to the
principles of the 2006 Vientiane Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Programme
component results correspond to all five focus areas of the UNICEF medium -term
strategic plan, 2006-2013.
Programme components
20. Programme components and results are presented below. Intermediate results
will be further defined in annual work plans, allowing for flexible focus and
adaptation to emerging opportunities. The programme comp onent results will be
adjusted if necessary during the Mid-Year Review in 2013.
21. Health and nutrition. The programme will address the following challenges:
large geographical disparities in health and nutrition; barriers to accessing services;
weak systems and human resource capacity; and low awareness of key family
practices. The expected result is that by 2015 the programme will achieve an
enhanced policy environment, increased coverage of quality services (MNCH,
nutrition, HIV), and improved practices by individuals, families and communities,
with particular emphasis on the most remote and vulnerable populations, resulting in
healthier children and mothers.
22.

Areas of cooperation include:

(a) Increased availability, accessibility and utilization of quality MNCH
services, including the roll-out of the MNCH package at the provincial and district
levels; strengthening the quality and reach of services for prevention of parent -tochild HIV transmission; expanding diarrhoea treatment using zinc; and incr easing
coverage of vitamin A supplementation;
(b) Expanding the coverage of evidence-based nutrition interventions to
reduce stunting and wasting, including close links with WASH. This will focus on
the prevention and treatment of malnutrition in women o f reproductive age and
children under five.

8

23. The programme strategy includes strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of
Health to implement both the National Nutrition Strategy and Plan of Action and the
comprehensive MNCH package, reaching the most vulnerable, and to strengthen the
capacity of communities to promote and maintain their own health. UNICEF will
use its operational experience to strengthen the sector in the areas of capacity
development, sector financing, marginal budgeting for bottlene cks and social
protection schemes.
24. Programme coordination will be assured through the existing Health Sector
Working Group established by the Government, and the co -chair role of UNICEF in
three technical working groups under the nutrition strategy of the Ministry of Health
(monitoring and evaluation, micronutrients and behaviour change).
25. Water, sanitation and hygiene. The programme will address the challenge of
wide disparities in access to and use of safe drinking water, and the rates of open
defecation and poor hygiene. It will support the national strategy for rural water
supply and environmental health that places emphasis on the off-road, rural
communities. It will operate within government schemes and seek to leverage
resources in this and other areas to scale up decentralized WASH approaches. The
expected result is that by 2015 children’s health and development will benefit from
equitable and sustainable access to, and use of, safe water and basic sanitation, with
particular emphasis on reaching rural remote areas.
26.

Areas of cooperation include:

(a) Supporting communities to improve sanitation and eliminate open
defecation community-wide, building on experience and lessons learned from
Community Approaches to Total Sanitation, as implement ed in other UNICEF
programmes and by other partners in Lao People’s Democratic Republic. This will
take advantage of the transformative process of achieving “open-defecation-free”
status to also promote hand-washing, household water treatment and safe storage;
(b) Ensuring that communities, schools and health centres have access to
safe water, with an emphasis on sustainability;
(c) Supporting improved, gender-sensitive, sanitation and hygiene facilities
for schools and health centres. All supported activities will focus on the most remote
and disaster-prone areas.
27. Programme strategies will focus on supporting the Ministry of Health and
concerned subnational departments to implement the National Strategy on Rural
Water Supply and Environmental Health. This component will support assessments
on climate change, water and vulnerable populations, capacity development and
advocacy for increased allocation for the WASH sector.
28. Programme coordination will be assured through UNICEF facilitating and
building partnerships with donor partners and NGOs working in the WASH sector,
under the guidance of the Ministry of Heath.
29. Education. This programme component will address the lack of preschool
education in remote areas; the poor coverage and quality of pr imary and secondary
education in educationally disadvantaged communities; the low survival rates in
primary education; and low transition rates, especially among ethnic groups. The
expected result of the programme is that by 2015 the most disadvantaged chi ldren

9

will be developmentally prepared for right-age entry into school, continue through
the last primary grade, and make the transition into lower secondary education.
30.

Areas of cooperation include:

(a) Strengthening education policies, budgets and systems that promote
equitable access to quality education;
(b) Ensuring that preschool-aged children, especially girls in educationally
disadvantaged communities, are better prepared for school;
(c) Ensuring that primary and secondary school-aged children, especially
girls in educationally disadvantaged communities, are enrolled in and complete
primary and secondary education.
31. The programme strategy includes: strengthening national capacity to plan,
budget, implement and monitor the education sector development framework with
an increased equity focus; supporting coordination of the education sector; systems strengthening to revise preschool, primary and secondary pre -service teaching and
learning materials that address the needs of disadvantaged ch ildren; service delivery
to implement community-based preschool readiness programmes and the Child Friendly Schools approach in primary and secondary schools in educationally
disadvantaged communities; and increasing the school readiness of children, using
age-appropriate, multimedia educational material aimed at children, parents and
caregivers.
32. Programme coordination will be assured through the Education Sector
Working Group, led by the Ministry of Education, and co -chaired by UNICEF and
the Government of Australia.
33. Child protection. The programme will address the challenges related to the
fragmentation of services and the lack of a national strategy and plan for a
comprehensive national social welfare system, while strengthening collaboration
among stakeholders. The expected result of the programme is that by 2015, children
are protected against abuse, exploitation, violence, neglect and discrimination
through the development of a legal, regulatory and social welfare system.
34.

Programme cooperation areas include:

(a) Supporting the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare to develop a child
protection system informed by a national policy on child protection;
(b) Supporting a child-sensitive and gender-appropriate justice system for
children in contact with the law that is increasingly accessed by children and that
complies with international standards;
(c) Establishing or strengthening subnational structures and mechanisms of
service coordination, delivery and referral.
35. Programme strategies include strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of
Social Welfare and Labour and other relevant ministries to develop, expand,
regulate, coordinate and monitor child and family welfare systems and services.
Evidence from innovative models will inform strategic communication to counter
exploitation, violence, abuse, discrimination and vulnerability to HIV. The
programme will also facilitate policy discussion on promoting greater understanding

10

of child protection among decision makers, and a better underst anding of costing
national plans, sector financing and leveraging resources.
36. Social policy. The expected result is that by 2015 children, young people and
women have their rights fulfilled through a strengthened knowledge, policy,
legislative and budgetary environment. The specific expected result for the learning
zone is that by 2015 there will be strengthened subnational capacity for evidence based and integrated planning, budgeting and monitoring to enhance delivery of
social services.
37.

Programme cooperation areas include:

(a) Monitoring disparities, building a knowledge base on children to support
evidence-based, child-centred policy advocacy and development and to influence
development plans and budgeting. Advocacy will focus on strengthening social
protection mechanisms and expanding social sector spending;
(b) Strengthening government capacity at all levels to monitor child -related
national and international obligations;
(c) At subnational level, and with support from the zone office,
strengthening linkages between social sector planning and decentralized
administrative planning processes, with a focus on improving delivery of social
services and addressing inequities.
38. The programme strategy includes strengthening partnerships with the National
Commission for Mothers and Children, the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the
National Assembly and local government. The programme will draw on the
technical knowledge and experience of the sectoral programmes when engaging in
policy discussions on child poverty and social protection.
39. Communication. The communication programme will promote behaviours
that will enhance child survival, development, protection, participation and social
inclusion. The expected result is that by the end of 201 5 families and communities,
especially in areas that are remote, poor and populated by underserved ethnic groups,
have increased demand for, and better access to, quality social services within a
supportive public and media environment.
40.

Programme cooperation areas include:

(a) External communication to support programme priorities and resource
mobilization;
(b) Applying Communication for Development methodology to support all
programme components, with priority attention given to nutrition, materna l
mortality reduction, sanitation and hygiene practices, and promoting the expression
of voices of youth, women and the most vulnerable.
41. The programme strategy includes strengthening the demand side of all
programme areas, in particular strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of
Health’s Centre for Information and Education on Health to undertake quality
communication interventions; and working with partners to support the capacity of
families and communities to promote and maintain their own health, including
through the piloting of new demand-led approaches to sanitation and hygiene. The
programme will also build the capacity of media to produce effective mass -media
educational programming for children and young people.

11

Cross-sectoral costs
42. Cross-sectoral results will focus on overall coordination and management of
the country programme, including improved intersectoral collaboration, monitoring
and evaluation, and support to the management of the UNDAF Joint Action Plan.
Major partnerships
43. The country programme will pursue strategic partnerships and widen
collaboration as a key strategy in addressing inequity. This will be achieved through
measures including strengthening and expanding key partnerships with (a) the
Australian Agency for International Development and Asia Development Bank in
the area of education; and (b) the Japan International Cooperation Agency and
Luxembourg Development in the area of health. In this Delivering as One country,
UNICEF will contribute to the collaborative work of the United Nations system,
leveraging United Nations resources for children. UNICEF will also implement joint
programmes with the World Health Organization, WFP and UNFPA in the areas of
health and nutrition, and will support further joint p rogramming with other United
Nations agencies. The programme will coordinate closely with UNDP, United
Nations Capital Development Fund, the World Bank, German Development
Cooperation, Netherlands Development Organization, and the International Labour
Organization. All partnerships will be coordinated through government -led technical
working groups.
44. In the current cycle, the country programme has benefited from funding
contributions from the Governments and/or the National Committees for UNICEF of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, as well as the European Union. UNICEF will seek
to maintain and expand on these partnerships in the new country programme.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The National Commission for Mothers and Children (chaired by the Standing
Deputy Prime Minister) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (which will sign the
UNDAF Joint Action Plan), remain the primary government counterparts of
UNICEF overseeing the coordination of UNICEF programme components and the
adjustment of intermediate results agreed with counterpart ministries. The National
Statistical Center, under the Ministry of Planning and Investment, maintains the
national socio-economic database, strengthening the use of LaoInfo, tracking
progress towards the National Socio-Economic Development Plan, Millennium
Development Goals and UNDAF targets. The Intermediate Results to be achieved
by UNICEF will be developed together with the Government following the third
UNDAF Strategic Retreat and should relate to the UNDAF outputs.
46. The results of the UNICEF-supported Lao Social Indicators Survey (2010) will
contribute to laying the baseline for the UNDAF Joint Action Plan and the National
Socio-Economic Development Plan, and will collect data on key indicators as they
relate to the Millennium Development Goals.
47. As far as possible, monitoring and review of the country programme will be
conducted through UNDAF processes and within the framework of the Vientiane
Declaration Action Plan. Evaluations and studies will be presented in the Integrated

12

Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, which will periodically mea sure progress towards
quantitative results; document lessons learned; monitor changes in institutions,
systems and attitudes affecting children and women; and track the contribution of
UNICEF to bringing about positive change. Monitoring and evaluation is a key
element for the achievement of planned results in the county programme and will
support organizational learning, in particular in the learning zone, and in building
the evidence base needed for effective policy advocacy. Strategic evaluations will
contribute to building evidence on high-impact interventions, prioritizing evaluation
of the impact of cross-sectoral results and equity-based approaches.

13

