Lebanon
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Lebanon
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.17) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 annual session (8-10 June
2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

Basic data†
(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

1.4

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

29

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2004)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2005)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (%, net, male/female, 2006)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

4
150 a
82/82
87
100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2000)
GNI per capita (US$)

7
5 770

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

74

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccines (%)

53

† More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at
http://www.unicef.org.
a
This 2005 estimate, developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and The World Bank, is adjusted
for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
http://www.childinfo.org/areas/maternalmortality/.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Lebanon’s second report on the fulfilment of the Millennium Development
Goals and the Common Country Assessment (CCA) provides the most recent
updates on progress towards the Goals. The need for further efforts to strengthen
national capacities in data collection, dissemination and analysis is recognized by
the Lebanese Government as a priority and is reflected in the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF).
2.
Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Although poverty incidence
is relatively low (with 29 per cent of Lebanese living below the upper poverty line
of $4 per capita/day, including 8 per cent under the lower poverty line of $2.4 per
capita/day) regional disparities persist. According to the United Nations assessment,
there is insufficient information to judge whether Lebanon is on track for achieving
this goal.
3.
Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education. High drop-out and repetition
rates in public schools, reaching 22 per cent and 48 per cent, respectively, low
quality of education and its high cost, not commensurate with learning
achievements, are the main challenges faced by the national education system.
According to the United Nations assessment, Lebanon is very likely to achieve this
goal.
4.
Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women. Gender parity in
education has yet to be translated into more active participation of women in social
life. The rates of economic participation for females (22 per cent) are much lower
than for males (73 per cent). Women’s representation in the political arena and in

2

decision-making roles in public governance remains limited. According to the
United Nations assessment, Lebanon is very likely to achieve this goal.
5.
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality. In the least developed regions, child
mortality is lagging at least two times behind the national average. Only a bout half
of the children get vaccination in medical facilities supervised by the Ministry of
Public Health, and there is no information on vaccination coverage by the private
sector. As a result, measles remain an important cause of child morbidity, with
Lebanon having the highest confirmed measles caseload (per 100,000 people) in the
region. 1 According to the United Nations assessment, Lebanon could achieve this
goal if extra efforts and changes are introduced.
6.
Goal 5. Improve maternal health. Although maternal health services are
generally accessible to more than 80 per cent of women, the national Millennium
Development Goals progress analysis suggests that maternal care tends to be
medicalized and dominated by the private sector, with little attention for the
prevention of illnesses. Overall, existing services are not quite commensurate with
the status of maternal mortality. According to the United Nations assessment,
Lebanon is very likely to achieve this goal.
7.
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. At the end of 2008,
the number of cases reported by the Ministry of Public Health exceeded 1,100, with
the World Health Organization (WHO) estimating the number to be even 2.5 times
higher. In 70 per cent of cases, the transmission of infe ction occurred through sexual
relations. Voluntary counselling and testing outlets are recent initiatives. According
to the United Nations assessment, there is insufficient information to judge whether
Lebanon is on track for achieving this goal.
8.
Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability. Water availability is perceived
as a critical issue. Levels of water pollution are high, and losses in water supply
systems reach up to 50 per cent of the water distributed through public networks.
According to the United Nations assessment, there is insufficient information to
judge whether Lebanon is on track for achieving this goal.
9.
Child protection (addressed in Section VI of the Millennium Declaration). In
Lebanon, child protection issues include the high numbers of children in residential
care facilities, the persistent child labour phenomenon, the insufficient application
of juvenile justice standards to children in conflict with the law, and the hidden
incidences of child abuse.
10. Adherence to the Millennium Declaration, Section V (genuine participation by
all citizens, including children and young people) is also a challenge. The concepts
of tolerance, coexistence and peaceful settlement of conflicting viewpoints are being
questioned by the young generations who faced the latest round of armed clashes in
Spring 2008, which reminded the Lebanese of the prolonged civil war of the 1980s.
11. Most of the above-mentioned issues were highlighted in the observations by
the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the third periodic report on the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in Lebanon. 2
The State Party was urged to undertake a number of actions: (a) strengthen data
collection and develop a comprehensive and time-bound national development
__________________
1
2

WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (EMRO), Measles Bulletin, October 2007.
Reviewed by the Committee in January 2006.

3

strategy and social programmes aiming at reducing poverty and strengthening
community development; (b) increase budgetary allocation for vulnerable children
at the local level to address existing disparities; (c) secure equal access to quality
primary health services for mothers and children in all areas; (d) guarantee free and
quality primary education and enrolment for all children; (e) develop standards for
services provided by non-governmental organizations (NGOs); (f) eliminate
discrimination against children belonging to vulnerable groups, such as children
with disabilities, foreign children, refugee and asylum-seeking children, Palestinian
children, children living in poverty, children in conflict with the law and children
living in rural areas; (g) review national legislation to bring it in line with the CRC
norms (the minimum age for marriage, for criminal responsibility, the right to a
nationality); (h) secure the right to be protected against violence and abuse; (i) avoid
separation of children from their family environment; and (j) fully implement
juvenile justice standards and secure the full realization of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of Palestinian refugee children. Lebanon has yet to ratify the
Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, which the
country signed in 2002.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation
12. For the last four years, the prevailing insecurity due to the political situation in
Lebanon has prevented United Nations agencies from completing the UNDAF and
developing five-year country programme documents (CPDs). Guided by the joint
United Nations Transitional Recovery Strategy in 2007 -2008, UNICEF operated on
the basis of one-year CPDs in 2007 and 2008. Another bridging CPD approved for
2009 provided a transition period to a new type of programmatic presence that is
commensurate with Lebanon’s middle-income country status and gives priority to
upstream work at the policy level.
Key results achieved
13. Most of the results achieved throughout 2006-2008 stem from the emergency
and post-crisis response. However, every effort was made to link the recovery
interventions with longer-term policy reform priorities in public health, water and
sanitation, education and protection, and emergency funds were used, to the extend
possible, to develop elements of future policy frameworks and mechanisms. Some
highlights of the results of collaboration among UNICEF and its governmental and
non-governmental partners are provided below:
(a) Enhanced immunization coverage rates in underserved districts.
Combined diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus vaccine and measles -containing vaccine
immunizations through the public health care system have exceeded 70 per cent
coverage in 17 out of Lebanon’s 27 Qazas (districts). The ‘Reach Every District’
approach piloted so far in 5 Qazas fostered a new partnership between the Ministry
of Public Health, the Ministry of Interior and the municipalities, whereby local
authorities were mobilized to reach out to every child.
(b) Modelling decentralized service delivery in hard-to-reach areas.
Brokering the alliance of the Ministry of Public Health, NGOs and local
municipalities for preventive health care and community outreach schemes served to
bring primary health care services and education for health promotion to about

4

60,000 people in Bent Jbeil, Marjeyoun, Hasbayeh, Akkar and Beqaa through the
network of 120 community health workers.
(c) Rehabilitation of water supply systems. Up to 460,000 people affected by
the 2006 conflict have regained access to safe drinking water in South Lebanon and
other parts of the country through the installation of 7 major water reservoirs (six of
200m3 capacity and one of 1,000m 3 ), 22 water storage tanks with chlorination units,
40 km of pipes, electrical generators for 6 pumping stations, and 10 mobile water
treatment units. In the Palestinian Nahr El Bared camp, destroyed after the
hostilities in summer 2007, UNICEF has maintained stable water supply for
approximately 20,000 people. As part of the camp’s reconstruction plan, UNICEF is
in charge of connecting 300 housing units to a permanent water supply network for
about 15,000 beneficiaries. Parallel to the emergency effort, UNICEF raised the
water quality issue with national water authorities and is coordinating with the
World Bank its advocacy for a national policy in this respect.
(d) Testing integrated packages of assistance to local communities. Basic
rehabilitation of public schools and their water and sanitati on facilities, hygiene
education, routine medical screening and child-centred classroom management were
the elements of the assistance delivered to 28 schools selected among those
particularly damaged during the 2006 and 2007 emergencies. In addition to di rectly
benefiting 3,800 students and their families, this cooperation experience between the
Ministry of Education, UNICEF and the NGO International Medical Corps equipped
all the partners with valuable lessons in planning multi-sectoral packages of
assistance at the community level.
(e) Brokering public-private sector partnerships. In close coordination with
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the ‘Adopt -a-School’
initiative piloted in some 20 locations was further strengthened by attracting new
donors and partners from the private sector. Converting schools into community
development centres in the most impoverished areas in Hermel, Tripoli, Akkar and
the Beqaa Valley helped addressing adult illiteracy, the high drop -out rates and poor
hygiene practices in schools and households. Through ‘Adopt -a-School’ as an entry
point, the private sector has been increasingly involved in local development issues.
(f) Action-based advocacy for juvenile justice. As a continuation of the
successful lobbying of UNICEF for the adoption of the Law 422 in 2002,
introducing the elements of the juvenile justice system in the country, UNICEF
joined efforts with the Ministry of Justice in building mechanisms to secure the
operationalization of the juvenile justice standards and to expand the application of
‘community work’ as an alternative to detention, increasing the number of cases
involving youth from barely 1 per cent in 2002–2005 to about 15 per cent in 2008.
UNICEF advocacy is aimed at gradually increasing the share of the Ministry of
Justice in funding the scheme in order to substantially expand the piloted approach.
(g) Initiation of an open public debate around the sensitive is sue of children
in residential care. Based on a UNICEF-supported study of almost 140 facilities, a
series of consultations with the Ministries of Social Affairs, Education, Finance and
Interiors, professional care givers, religious leaders and the media ha ve been
launched to pave the way for a comprehensive reform of Lebanon’s residential child
care system.

5

(h) Launching of child protection networks. On the basis of the partnerships
established for emergency psycho-social assistance to the displaced populations
during the 2006 conflict (25 child-friendly spaces, 7 youth centres, more than 25
NGO partners and several municipalities) with an estimated outreach to some
250,000 children and young people, the local municipalities and the NGOs have
been increasingly taking ownership of child protection responsibilities. This aims at
the institutionalization of the child protection focal points as regular staff in targeted
municipalities.
(i) Launch of an innovative television programme. Sawtouna (Our Voice) is
a television programme produced by young people for the youth, aired on the main
television channel twice a month. The audience coverage has been stable since
2006, with each broadcast reaching no fewer than 300,000 viewers in 2008. Based
on viewership data, it is estimated that at least 35 per cent of the Lebanese youth are
familiar with Sawtouna.
Lessons learned
14. In an attempt to address the issue of disparities, international donors have been
increasingly engaged in decentralized programming. Howeve r, it was not before
2008 that these multiple experiences were brought together under the umbrella of
the European Union-led Consultative Group of donors on decentralization and
reviewed in terms of their effectiveness and sustainability. Consequently, the need to
shift from a project-based approach to a more comprehensive social policy planning
strategy emerged from the experience of the United Nations and other donor
agencies, aimed at addressing larger poverty alleviation measures and sector -wide
reforms. Expertise in social policy planning and commitment to high -level
advocacy, geared to translate pilot successes into systemic normative and budgetary
changes, were acknowledged as key inputs to address the needs and issues identified
in a middle-income country context.
15. The joint United Nations programming has been taking shape since 2007 –
2008. The implementation of the National Youth Policy project and the Palestinian
Nahr El Bared Palestinian camp reconstruction programme offer two examples of
how coherent United Nations action can bring clear benefits. There is a consensus
among the members of the United Nations Youth Task Force that joint advocacy and
continuous pressure for a more definite youth agenda has helped gain the
commitment of key national stakeholders in the Cabinet of Ministers and the
Ministry of Youth and Sports. The Palestinian Nahr El Bared reconstruction project,
which has addressed a complex set of infrastructural needs, is an example of the
economy of scale, the division of responsibilities guided by technical considerations
and availability of corresponding expertise in individual agencies. The project also
highlights the particular benefits of much closer interaction among the United
Nations agencies, the United Nations Resident Coordinator (UNRC) and United
Nations Relief and Work Agency (UNRWA) in all technical and coordination
matters.
16. The provision of integrated packages of key interventions, incorporating
services for health, water and sanitation, education and protection h as been tested
since 2006, in collaboration with international and national NGOs, line ministries
and municipalities. It has proved to be an effective strategy for community outreach.
Using schools as educational entry points to health and water, sanitatio n and

6

hygiene (WASH) issues has helped mobilize parents, community leaders, local
service providers and municipal administrations around challenges affecting the
well-being of children. However, as confirmed during midyear and annual
programme reviews in 2007-2008, managing integrated projects requires a certain
realignment of UNICEF staffing capacity, such as assigning the responsibility for a
local project modelling to a single manager rather than splitting this responsibility
across sectoral units.
17. The UNICEF comprehensive audit in 2008, the annual reviews in 2007 -2008
and the individual project reviews confirmed the weakness of the monitoring and
evaluation function throughout the entire programme cycle. The strategy of relying
on the capacity of implementing partners in monitoring and evaluation proved to be
ineffective, calling for a consolidation of the monitoring and evaluation tasks within
UNICEF. Regularization of the monitoring and evaluation function will also secure
appropriate UNICEF inputs to the recently established government monitoring
systems that track international assistance flows (such as the Development
Assistance Database at the Prime Minister’s Office).

The country programme 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 750

750

2 500

Child protection

625

2 680

3 305

Life skills for adolescence

625

2 400

3 025

Cross-sectoral costs

750

1 670

2 420

3 750

7 500

11 250

Social policy

Total

Preparation process
18. The country programme for 2002-2006 has been extended three times (for
2007, 2008 and 2009, respectively), in response to the country’s complex political
developments and a series of emergencies. The current CPD proposal has b enefited
from the findings of the Common Country Assessment conducted in 2007, and is
developed in line with the UNDAF 2010-2014 expected outcomes. The CPD draws
upon the results of internal programme performance reviews in 2007 -2008
(including lessons learnt during the emergency in 2006), technical discussions with
governmental and NGO experts, and formal consultations with key government
counterparts and United Nations agencies in early 2009. The concluding
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on Lebanon’s periodic reports (in
2006 and 2008) provided important guidance in reaching a consensus on refining the
country programme priorities.

7

Goals, key results and strategies
19. Within the overall commitment to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
the goal of the country programme of cooperation between UNICEF and the
Government of Lebanon is to place children and adolescents at the centre of the
national social policy agenda and to include most disadvantaged and excluded
populations in a social protective environment. The principle of non-exclusion will
be maintained a corner stone of the country programme of cooperation, as more
equitable development is fundamental for preventing the risk of conflicts rooted in
inequality and for sustaining any previously achieved results for children all across
Lebanon. At the same time, emerging challenges faced by children, youth and women
will be examined, with a view to suggest innovative strategies of UNICEF engagement in
the context of a middle-income country, such as Lebanon.
20. The attainment of this goal implies the incorporation of a children’s rights based approach, grounded in the norms of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and guided by the Millennium Development Goals, in the national social policy
agenda at all levels. The planned key results of the cooperation programme
correspond to the problem areas highlighted by the Common Country Assessment:
(a) insufficient data collection and analysis capacity; (b) policy gaps in key sectors;
(c) absence of regular mechanisms to ensure adherence to human rights frameworks
and standards; and (d) limited opportunities for young people to develop to their full
potential and participate in social life. The suggested key results are as follows:
(a) Updated and disaggregated data and in-depth analysis of the situation of
children and adolescents is available to guide decision -making and national policy
formulation in the areas of health care, education and HIV/AIDS.
(b) High-quality analysis of social policies, national legislation and
budgetary allocations for the achievement of women’s and children’s rights is
produced and used for high-level advocacy for social policy and resource allocation
improvements.
(c) Alternatives for judicial and administrative improvements in the area of
child protection and juvenile justice are analysed and discussed, with the view of
enhancing a protective environment for all children living i n Lebanon.
(d) National policies and systems for creating more space for adolescent
participation and development of their life skills are discussed, with the view of
enhancing the national role and capacity of adolescents in preventing conflict and
violence and promoting a culture of tolerance and peace.
21. The general strategy of the country programme of cooperation uses evidence
to develop and further enhance national social development policies,
implementation mechanisms, norms and standards in health, water and sanitation,
education and protection. To this end, the capacity of relevant ministries and other
public agencies will be strengthened. Evidence obtained from research and analysis
will be enriched by limited modelling of integrated local devel opment approaches,
as part of joint UNDAF initiatives in targeted areas. These two mutually reinforcing
streams of knowledge will feed into nationwide policy reforms, to ultimately
materialize as appropriate budgetary and institutional shifts.
22. In Lebanon’s complicated political and security environment, maintaining a
degree of disaster risk management and humanitarian response capacity is critical.

8

All programmes will have a built-in contingency component, aiming to guarantee
minimal assistance standards. Preparedness for any sudden deterioration of the
situation will include stand-by agreements with key field outreach actors (the
Lebanese Red Cross and major national NGOs); identification of operational hubs;
warehousing and distribution capacities in high-risk areas for rapid interventions;
completion of administrative preparations for organizational surge -capacity
mobilization; and adherence to minimum operating security standards to ensure the
security of UNICEF staff and assets.
23. Sound communication strategy, including both communication for
development and advocacy, will be vital to achieving significant results for children
over the next five years. It will continue to cultivate long-term relationships with
Lebanon’s private sector, paving the way for sustainable partnerships.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
24. The proposed country programme of cooperation reflects the priorities of the
national Social Action Plan, ‘Toward Strengthening Social Safety Nets and Access
to Basic Social Services’, including poverty reduction, increased efficiency in social
spending and the need to elaborate a comprehensive medium- and long-term social
development agenda, supported by detailed action plans and appropriate budgeting.
It is aligned with the outcomes of the UNDAF 2010-2014, formulated in response to
major national concerns, such as regional disparities, social exclusion, weak
governance and environmental degradation. Strengthening the human rights culture
has been acknowledged as a fundamental requirement to frame the country’s socio economic reform agenda. The CCA and UNDAF underline the need for universal
recognition of the human rights of the Lebanese and Palestinian populations alike.
Relationship to international priorities
25. The goals of the proposed country programme components are in line with the
standards and norms introduced by the CRC and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). They are aligned with
the Millennium Development Goals, as well as the targets of the Millennium
Declaration and A World Fit for Children and the recommendations of Committee
on the Rights of the Child and of the United Nations Study on Violence against
Children. The proposed country programme aligns with the UNICEF medium-term
strategic plan for 2006-2011, placing particular emphasis on focus area 4 (child
protection from violence, exploitation and abuse) and focus area 5 (policy, advocacy
and partnerships for children’s rights).
Programme components
26. The social policy programme component is designed to take into consideration
the specific situation of Lebanon as a middle-income country where setting up a
consensual agenda for action and prioritizing the use of available resources is key.
To ensure that the national socio-economic development agenda acquires an explicit
child-rights dimension, the awareness and understanding of the Government and
other stakeholders of their obligations under the international human rights
conventions need to be considerably strengthened while their skills to plan,
formulate and monitor child-focused social policies at the national and local levels
need to be improved. To this end, the programme component will focus on the

9

provision of high-quality technical advice in thematic policy analyses in health,
education, water and sanitation, social protection and other areas directly affecting
the well-being of children and women, including public expenditure reviews of
resource allocation for children.
27. Generating gender-disaggregated statistical data and qualitative analysis for
evidence-based policymaking will form the thrust of the social policy programme
component. Greater utilization of the results from the Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey (MICS) will be achieved by opening the DevInfo database for public use by
the Central Administration for Statistics. Regularly updated analysis of the situation
of children and women (including those of Palestinian origin) and advocacy with the
Government, parliamentarians, civil society organizations, community leaders,
young people and children will remain critical strategies. Lebanon’s renowned
academic community will be increasingly tapped to support UNICEF work. Private sector alliances will be further fostered as an important funding channel and as a
platform to promote a culture of social responsibility.
28. The contribution of UNICEF to the national reform agenda and to policy
development will be backed by some degree of participation in initiatives to support
the capacity of local development actors, implemented jointly with UNDAF
partners, the World Bank and the European Union. Transferring the experience of
integrated packages of UNICEF-supported interventions into planning, budgeting
and operational guidelines for decentralized development will be another important
result of the social policy programme component.
29. The child protection programme component will focus on reinvigorating the
CRC and the CEDAW as result-oriented platforms of action for all children. The
situation of the Palestinian children represents an area of particular concern.
Revision of national legislation, closure of existing legislative gaps and
development of procedural and budgeting mechanisms — to support family-based
care, introduce and expand juvenile justice principles, prevent child abuse and
exploitation and protect children from violence and involvement in armed
conflicts — will serve as building blocks in the creation of a protective environment
for all children, irrespective of their nationality. Child protection networks will
provide a forum for information exchanges, joint advocacy and coordination among
the stakeholders representing the large spectrum of actors from governmental
entities, NGOs, academic institutions and the media.
30. The life skills for adolescence programme component will be innovative in
testing initiatives enabling for a smooth transition of adolescent boys and girls from
childhood to adulthood, contributing to preventing conflict and violence and to
promoting the culture of tolerance and peace. It will particularly target the
underserved areas of the country where developmental opportunities for adolescents
and youth are especially limited, including the Palestinian camps. Programmes will
be introduced to equip young boys and girls with knowledge and skills to avert the
threats to their health (including HIV infection), develop social and cultural
tolerance, master techniques in conflict resolution and apply creativity in identifying
resources for self-development. Both school-based and out-of-school channels to
deliver life skills education to the Lebanese and Palestinian youth will be explored,
using the existing infrastructure of social development centres, municipalities,
voluntary counselling and testing centres, UNRWA schools and national NGO
facilities.

10

31. Cross-sectoral costs will be used to support staff and non-staff costs,
including for safety and security, risk management, training and travel,
accountability and management efficiency, common services, offi ce equipment,
operations, and business continuity arrangements, in case of emergency.
Major partnerships
32. The United Nations agencies and the World Bank, as well as major national
and international NGOs, will continue to be key partners of the countr y programme,
as will the Lebanese Ministries of Foreign Affairs; Finance; Social Affairs; Health;
Education; Justice; Internal and Municipal Affairs; Water and Energy; and Youth
and Sports. In addition to joint UNDAF initiatives, workplans will be closely
aligned with UNDP, WHO, UNRWA and the World Bank. UNDAF outcome
working groups, European Union-led donor consultative forums on decentralization
and water and sanitation, UNRC coordination cells in the North and South Lebanon
will be extensively used as already tested collaboration channels. Partnerships will
also be expanded with the Higher Council for Childhood, the Council for
Development and Reconstruction and the Union of Municipalities. Collaboration
with Lebanon’s academic institutions will be fostered for the national, as well as the
regional socio-economic development agenda of the Middle East and North Africa
Regional Office (MENARO) and the ‘South-South’ exchange of experience and
know-how. The business community will be an important target audience of
UNICEF advocacy, given the private sector’s leading role in many innovative cross sectoral initiatives.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
33. Monitoring and evaluation are key tools for the country programme and the
UNDAF. Practices and systems for evidence-based planning, data collection,
analysis and dissemination will be strengthened within UNICEF. Internal knowledge
management systems will be linked to the DevInfo hosted by the Central
Administration for Statistics and the Development Assistance Database at the Prime
Minister’s Office. A five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (IMEP)
and annual IMEPs will identify monitoring and evaluation mechanisms as well as
major studies, surveys, evaluations and research products. The monitoring plan will
reflect the UNDAF Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Framework.
34. The progress of the cooperation programme will be analysed during the
midterm review (MTR) in the second quarter of 2012. The MTR findings, supported
by the results of annual reviews and routine monitoring, will inform the UNDAF
evaluation, which would take place in 2014. All reviews will be coordinated with
national implementing partners under the leadership of the Prime Minister’s Office
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
35. Each programme component will be directly managed by a respective officer,
and closely coordinated with respective line ministries and other non -governmental
partners. The Deputy Representative will coordinate programme implementation
within the office while the Representative will oversee the country programme
implementation, closely liaising with Lebanese governmental and non -governmental
partners, donors and international development partners, the United Nations country
team, MENARO and UNICEF headquarters. The UNICEF country management
team will regularly review the status of programme implementation, based on key

11

results progress updates, budget utilization information, continuous risk assessment
and other performance indicators.

12

