Liberia
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Liberia
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.19) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.0

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

103

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female, 2008-2009)

15 a,c
15/15, ../.. c
990 b
44/40

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

46

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

73

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

18

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

1.5

Child labour (%, 5-14 year olds, 2007)

21

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2007)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

4c
3/4, 5/3, 1/7 c
190

One year olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

64

One year olds immunized against measles (%)

64

†

a
b

c

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
994 deaths per 100,000 live births is the estimate for 2001-2007 reported in the Democratic
and Health Survey, 2007. The Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts),
adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information,
see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Data differ from standard indicator definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
In Liberia, exclusion, inequality and underdevelopment are now being
addressed, as President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf starts her second six -year term. The
Economic Growth and Development Strategy/Poverty Reduction Strategy 2013 2017 (EGDS/PRS2), still under consultation, are aimed at supporting the goal of
achieving middle-income status by 2030, one of the goals of Vision 2030, the
national development agenda. The Children’s Act, launched in February 2012,
reflects the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The United
Nations Mission in Liberia has guaranteed security, though its presence will shrink
over the next five years.
2.
Liberia’s population of 3.5 million, as of 2008, may rise to 5 million by 2018,
given the country’s growth rate of 2.1 and total fertility rate of 5.8. The 2008 census
reports 1.65 million people living in urban areas and 1.8 million children under
18 years. The poorest quintile has double the fertility of the wealthiest quintile. Life
expectancy is 57 years, and 84 per cent of the people live on less than $1.25 per day.
The gross domestic product per capita is only $396 (2011 Human Development

2

Report), and Liberia ranks 182 out of 187 countries on the 2011 Human
Development Index.
3.
The situation analysis 2012 and the equity and inclusion analysis 2011 1
identify key issues that inform the new country programme: (a) the rights of women
and girls, undermined by gender-based violence and inappropriate initiation of
sexual activity; (b) children’s migration to urban areas for education, putting them at
risk of labour and sexual exploitation; (c) inadequate adolescent-friendly
reproductive health services; and (d) young people’s lack of preparation for
employment. Inequity in access to services and inequality in outcomes are extreme
between wealth rankings, counties and urban-rural location, and services are not
responsive to the local context. Data averages hide extreme pockets of urban
poverty.
4.
Between 2000 and 2007, the infant mortality rate improved from 117 per 1,000
live births to 71 per 1,000 live births. 2 But infant mortality in the South-Central
region is double that of Monrovia, and there is a difference of almost 50 per cent
between the poorest and the wealthiest quintiles. Routine immunization coverage
has risen, from 39 per cent in 2000 to 75 per cent in 2011, because of UNICEFsupported programmes. However, immunization coverage in the south -eastern
region was only one quarter of that in Monrovia, according to the Liberia
Demographic and Health Survey (LDHS) 2007. Stunting puts 42 per cent of
children at risk of impaired cognitive development.
5.
The maternal mortality ratio showed a troubling trend, worsening from 578 per
100,000 live births (2000 LDHS) to 990 per 100,000 live births in 2011 (Human
Development Report 2011). 3 The trend worsened despite improvement in access to
antenatal care: in 2008, just 37 per cent of pregnant women had four or more
antenatal visits, compared to 66 per cent of women receiving such visits in 2010.
Only 7 per cent of babies are registered (though the figure was 4 per cent before a
2011 campaign).
6.
Eleven per cent of girls marry by age 15 and 38 per cent by age 18, according
to the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in 2008. Twenty per cent of girls
experience sex before age 15, one in seven against their will. A third of girls aged
15-19 are mothers or pregnant, and girls in south-eastern Liberia are four times
more likely to be married early than girls living in Monrovia. In 2007, HIV
prevalence among women aged 15-49 years was 1.8, compared to 1.2 for men. In
2007, 58 per cent of women (ages 15-58 years) were estimated to have undergone
genital cutting.
7.
Only 40 per cent of people have access to water points, based on normal
capacity of 250 persons. Only 4 per cent of rural households use improved
sanitation facilities, compared to 21 per cent in urban areas, while 49 per cent
practice open defecation.
__________________
1

2

3

This report analyses the situation of children and women with an equity lens within the context
of a rapidly evolving equity thinking in Liberia, linked in particular to the elaboration of the
next poverty reduction strategy and Vision 2030.
Unless otherwise stated, 2007 data refer to Liberia Demographic and Health Survey. Although
overall figures are showing a decline, which will be confirmed through the LDHS 2013, the
pattern of inequity is likely to have remained until the impact of the new equity focus of the
poverty reduction strategy is felt.
The basis for calculation changed during the period.

3

8.
Liberians attach great importance to education, but the basic education system
continues to fail children due to access and quality issues. The resulting migration
puts girls particularly at risk. 4 Of the 20,547 disabled children recorded in the 2008
census, only 7,125 children with significant disabilities are in school.
9.
Liberia is likely to meet the Millennium Development Goal 1 hunger target
and Goal 3 (empowerment of women). It might achieve Goal 4 (reduce child
mortality), Goal 6 (combat HIV/AIDS) and the malaria target. The country is
unlikely to achieve the poverty target of Goal 1 or Goal 2 (primary education),
Goal 5 (maternal health) or Goal 7 (ensure environmental sustainability).

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
10. UNICEF has been playing a key role in coordination among partners in the
nutrition, education, child protection and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
sectors. The pooled fund mechanisms in health and education, co -chaired by
UNICEF, are helping to finance unfunded priority need by delivering education and
health services using government procurement procedures. They have supported
development of key government policies, strategies and institutions that provide the
solid foundation for delivering better outcomes over the next five years: the
nutrition division in the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare; the Liberia Code for
Marketing Breast-milk Substitutes; the WASH Compact, 5 the five-year Strategic
Plan; the Education Reform Act 2011, which provides free and compulsory basic
education; the Children’s Act; prevention of mother -to-child transmission (PMTCT)
of HIV and paediatric HIV guidelines; the 10-year Health and Social Welfare Plan;
and the revised road map for accelerating reduction of maternal and newborn
morbidity and mortality 2011-2015.
11. The UNICEF contribution to the basic package of health services has shown
positive results, as indicated in the 2008-2012 consolidated results report:
(a) maternal and neonatal tetanus have been eliminated; (b) the country is on target
to achieve goals for acquisition of solar refrigerators and for penta -vaccine, but
possibly not for vaccination against measles, despite universal immunization
campaigns; (c) 73 per cent of children under 5 are sleeping under an insecticide treated mosquito net, compared to 18 per cent in 2006; (d) malaria prevalence has
been halved; (e) 69 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women are receiving PMTCT
services, compared to 37 per cent in 2010; (f) 44 per cent of infants of HIV -positive
mothers are on antiretroviral therapy, compared to 15 per cent in 2010; (g) 50 per
cent of the expected caseload of severely malnourished children is now included in
the new essential package of health services; and (h) acute malnutrition was reduced
from 5.8 to 2.2 per cent.
__________________
4

5

4

Children migrate from rural to urban areas, especially Monrovia, for better quality secondary
education. Many children also migrate to work at mines or in urban areas. For example, in
Montserrado County, the actual population of girls aged 10-19 is approximately 20,000 more
than the estimated figures. (Source: Analysis of National Population and Housing Census 2008.)
The two-year WASH Compact, involving the Government, UNICEF, UNDP, the World Bank,
USAID as well as civil society and the private sector, aims to accelerate results by address ing
barriers and bottlenecks.

12. Over 500,000 people have access to improved water and sanitation facilities
through construction and rehabilitation of facilities and safe hygiene promotion.
UNICEF supported nationwide mapping of water points using global positioning
systems through mobile-phone technology for the Waterpoint Atlas, which is
disaggregated by county/district/clan. This is a key planning tool for implementation
of the WASH strategic plan 2012-2017.
13. UNICEF has worked to reach marginalized children as the coordinating
agency for the Education Sector Plan (2010-2020), which secured $40 million from
the Fast Track Initiative. The consolidated results report highlights Ministry of
Education successes, which include an increase in the primary net -enrolment rate
from 25 per cent to 44 per cent. The accelerated learning programme reached
280,000 children, providing second-chance education for those whose schooling
was disrupted by the civil war.
14. UNICEF-supported initiatives for peacebuilding empowered 21,000 young
people with leadership and dispute-resolution skills. This accelerated
intergenerational reconciliation, reduced gender-based violence and discrimination,
and increased the participation of young people, particularly young women, in
decision-making structures.
15. A new police division dedicated to protect women and children was created; it
is now operational in all counties. UNICEF provided training on working with
children and women for the judiciary and police. Some 5,000 children in institutions
were reunified with their families or provided with quality foster care and support
through community-based protection systems.
16. In 2009, UNICEF, the Government of Liberia and civil society organized the
first-ever children’s festival in Liberia. It is now part of the annual calendar of
events, with 20,000 children participating throughout the country. In 2012, the
President used it to launch the new Children’s Act. The UNICEF -supported Liberia
Children’s Parliament has organized consultations with a wide range of children,
including vulnerable children, and shared their concerns with the President and
other levels of government. UNICEF has partnered with over 30 community radio
stations across the 15 counties, providing key information on health, education and
development. This initiative enables adolescents and youth, even in isolated and
disadvantaged communities with poor communications, to speak out on issues
concerning them.
17. With United Nations agencies and other partners, UNICEF supported the
Government’s humanitarian response to the Ivorian refugee crisis during 2011 -2012.
UNICEF led the partners’ contribution to the emergency response in nutrition,
WASH, education and child protection for 180,000 refugees and 200 host
communities spread over 800 km of border. The crisis hindered host community
food security and services and remains a potential source of fragili ty. It highlighted
the need for all sectors to have disaster risk reduction and preparedness plans,
covering situations from floods to cholera to refugees.
Lessons learned
18. At community level, pilot projects can be sustainable if the policy framewor k
is developed at the national level. The social cash transfer programme piloted in
Bomi County — implemented by the Government of Liberia and supported by

5

UNICEF — reaches the most disadvantaged families. They identify their own
priorities and meet them through unconditional cash transfers, with additional
incentives for school enrolment. An evaluation by Boston University found that
beneficiary households had better health; higher rates of school enrolment,
attendance and performance; better food security; and better maintenance of
housing. This has provided the evidence for going to scale and for inclusion in
EGDS/PRS2 and the Social Protection Policy.
19. National policy development — for education, health, nutrition, water, and
child protection — has been necessary to provide a framework for service
development. However, it has proved insufficient to deliver improved services,
particularly in remote areas, due to capacity weaknesses at county/district/facility
levels, affecting both systems and staff capability to deliver.
20. A focus on national policies and service provision does not result in improved
take-up where services remain nationally defined and unresponsive to local context.
Community-level structures, particularly health, education and child welfare
committees, must be supported. Community health volunteers cannot deliver
without support, recognition or compensation. The pilot of the Gbarpolu accelerated
child survival initiative, through partnership with local health committees, workers
and community health volunteers, resulted in a 56 per cent increase in deliveries
performed in health facilities and significant reductions in malaria, diarrhoea and
acute respiratory infections. The initiative has focused on empowering community
health volunteers with knowledge and skills on integrated community case
management. Supported by influential community groups, including female health promotion volunteers (“Grand Mas”), it has become a model of the integrated
community case management approach to childhood diseases. It will be expanded
by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare to other parts of the country.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Young child survival and development

7 500

44 000

51 500

Inclusive quality education

2 500

38 780

41 280

Child protection

2 750

20 000

22 750

Policy advocacy, communication for
development and partnerships

3 220

3 750

6 970

Planning, monitoring and evaluation

2 000

1 500

3 500

Cross-sectoral

5 500

18 500

24 000

Total

23 470

126 530

150 000

Preparation process
21. The programme was developed following a series of consultations led by the
Ministry of Finance and Development Planning. These involved relevant line
ministries (Education, Social Welfare, Public Works, Gender and Development,

6

Justice and Youth and Sports), the independent National Human Rights
Commission, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, donors, United
Nations agencies, women’s groups and children and adolescents, including those
marginalized, excluded and affected by HIV/AIDS, along wit h members of the
Liberia Children’s Parliament.
Programme components, results and strategies
22. The country programme will contribute to achievement of EGDS/PRS2
national priorities and results, with specific focus on the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged children, particularly in areas low on the Child Well -being Index.
EGDS/PRS2 priorities are as follows: (a) ensure equal access to high -quality free
and compulsory basic education and a variety of post-basic education/training
opportunities; (b) improve the health, nutrition and welfare of the population on an
equitable basis; (c) increase access to safe water and sanitation and improve hygiene
practices; and (d) protect the poorest and most vulnerable households and groups
from poverty, deprivation, hunger and malnutrition, and support them in attaining a
minimum standard of living. The EGDS/PRS2 seeks to create an atmosphere of
peaceful coexistence based on reconciliation and conflict -resolution and to provide
security and access to justice and the rule of law to all.
23. The country programme will be part of the One United Nations Programme as
a “Delivering as One” self-starter. UNICEF will work with partners to create
demand and ensure integrated service delivery in deprived parts of urban Monrovia
and the poorest parts of the country, focusing on the South-Eastern region. The
programme has five components, three main and two cross -cutting, with gender,
emergency interventions and HIV/AIDS mainstreamed across components in areas
of comparative advantage for UNICEF. Each component will aid capacity building,
with strengthened accountability mechanisms in support of the Government’s
decentralization agenda.
24. The programme will support upstream policy development, where needed,
while emphasizing policy implementation and service delivery in partnership with
line ministries, NGOs and community-based organizations. Capacities of
community-level committees, which include women and youth, will be strengthened
in demand creation, service delivery, and monitoring and evaluation. National
investment in connectivity will enable the country to develop new solutions to
constraints, building on experience such as “Connecting Classrooms”. 6
25. The programme will operate countrywide, supporting the Government to
develop and implement national policies. The activities will ensure that urban and
rural communities having the poorest outcomes receive appropriate services that
meet their needs and context. Risk management will be integrated in planning and
management of the programme to ensure targeted results. The programme will
further strengthen its coordination support to pooled funds in education and health,
and there will be a multisectoral focus on adolescents. Overall, the programme
parallels the goal expressed by the President in her January 2012 inauguration
speech: “putting young people first and lifting the lives of all Liberians”.
__________________
6

This innovative global programme uses technology to improve education. It connects students
from more than 20 countries through the internet, helping them exchange experiences and learn
about cultures through class projects.

7

26. Within schools and communities, work will be undertaken to prevent violence
against children, particularly girls. Community-based integrated child survival,
growth and development, as part of the essential package of health services, will be
piloted and scaled up to collectively promote family -care practices. These will
include hygiene, stimulation for children belo w 2 years, HIV prevention and
protection of children.
27. All components will support sector planning and capacity building to manage
disasters in line with the draft national policy on disaster risk management,
consistent with the Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action.
Adaptation, preparedness, response and recovery interventions will rely on and help
build government systems nationally and within counties.
Programme components
28. Young child survival and development. This programme component will
enable children to have a healthy start to life, avoiding irreversible damage to their
future cognitive development.
29. Health. This sub-component will contribute to a 10 per cent reduction in
maternal mortality rates and a 15 per cent reduction in under-five mortality rates by
2017. It will operate through sustained immunization and use of the essential
package of health services, including antenatal care with HIV testing and PMTCT
services. The focus will be on increasing access to and use o f evidenced-based and
cost-effective maternal, newborn and child health interventions by the most
vulnerable populations. The sub-component will work through expansion of the
integrated child health initiative, including integrated community case managemen t.
It has three areas of intervention: (a) expanded programme on immunization,
emphasizing reduction of vaccine-preventable diseases and maintaining protection
against polio; (b) Primary health care, which will maintain clinics, ensure
implementation of the essential package of health services and support malaria control activities and reproductive health services, including for adolescents; and
(c) PMTCT and scale-up of paediatric care. UNICEF will continue contributing to
the health pool fund, which will improve access to health services and
implementation of the 10-year National Health and Social Welfare Policy and Plan
in a decentralized manner. UNICEF will advocate for evidence -based planning and
budgeting using the Marginal Budgeting for Bottlenecks to ol for sustainable and
adequate funding for the health sector.
30. Nutrition. This sub-component will contribute to improving the nutritional
status of children and women. It will emphasize reducing stunting from 41 per cent
to 35 per cent among children under 5, with a special focus on children below 2
years and in the most marginalized south-eastern counties and urban Monrovia.
UNICEF will support the Government to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework in order to initiate, scale up and sustain nutrition interventions. To
increase access and coverage, service delivery will be decentralized through
mobilization of community volunteers. National advocacy to promote nutrition as
fundamental to development will be intensified, addressing underlying causes of
under-nutrition through a life-cycle approach, linked to livelihood and social
protection initiatives. Maternal nutrition interventions, including for adolescents,
will also be supported.

8

31. WASH. This sub-component aims to reduce risks to children from inadequate
safe water, sanitation and hygiene. In line with the sector strategic plan 2012 -2017,
it will support the Government to implement the country’s WASH Compact and
sector strategic plan, develop an information system and improve decentra lized
service delivery. The work will be based on low-cost/high-impact approaches and
effective leadership in emergency preparedness and response. It will promote
scaling up current operational strategies, including hand -pump maintenance, pointof-use water treatment and storage, community-led total sanitation, urban WASH
and water quality surveillance. There will be renewed focus on services for the
poorest communities in urban Monrovia and in the South -Eastern region, building
on water-point mapping for better planning and targeting. The WASH Compact
re-energizes commitment to environmental sustainability and Millennium
Development Goal 7.
32. Inclusive quality education. This programme component will support the
Government in responding to disparities in rural and urban areas. At national level,
advocacy and policy dialogue for implementation of the new Education Act will be
the major focus, using data including a study on out-of-school children. At
school/district/county levels, the roll-out of the child-friendly school approach will
be the entry point for building capacity in planning, management, supervision and
monitoring. Child-friendly schools will be facilitated by collaboration between the
health, nutrition, child protection, communication for development and WASH
sectors in selected disadvantaged areas. Additionally, UNICEF will work with the
World Food Programme on its school-feeding programme. A monitoring, evaluation
and reporting system will be developed to provide qualitative and quantitative
measureable indicators of learning quality and learner performance. Where
necessary, particular cohorts will be studied to gather detailed evidence.
33. The programme will take a life-cycle approach. It will use early childhood
development as a foundation for addressing access and quality in pre -primary and
basic education. Early childhood development will be piloted and scaled up in
selected counties, taking into account strategies developed with support of the
Global Partnership for Education. Curriculum development will be supported
following review of the current national pilot in 2015, including addressing the
disaster risk management policy. The programme will promot e innovation and
technology initiatives for children living in remote areas, with the goal of reducing
migration pressure. The initiative will also attend to the specific needs of children
with disabilities by helping them access information, education and skills training
though the use of computers and internet. The programme will develop learning
approaches that incorporate life skills for out-of-school children, appropriate to age,
circumstances and local context. The strategies will prepare younger chil dren to reenter formal school and older children to link into pre -vocational training in line
with the goals of Vision 2030 and the President’s commitment, affirmed during her
inaugural address to the nation upon her re-election, to “give young people the skills
they need to prosper and create the life they choose”.
34. Child protection. This programme component seeks to protect vulnerable
children so they can pass through childhood and adolescence without risk of
compromising their future. It will support the new National Child Well-being
Council and implementation of the Children’s Act to establish the laws, policies and
systems necessary to ensure an environment that prevents violations of children ’s
rights and provides appropriate and child-friendly responses to violations that occur.

9

It will empower children and young people to claim and exercise their rights. In
addition, it will seek to support children and young people in their communities by
facilitating the inclusion of children and youth in decisi on-making processes.
35. The component will also emphasize inclusion of boys and girls living with
disabilities and those from disadvantaged backgrounds. It will strengthen
community-based protection and response mechanisms, working closely with child
welfare committees, traditional and religious leaders, women and other community based groups. It will assure that adequate emergency preparedness and response
systems are in place to respond to the needs of all boys and girls affected by
emergencies. Communication for development messaging will be used to build
positive social norms around childhood and adolescence.
36. Social protection. This sub-component will focus on building sustainable
systems for social services and creating safety nets for the most v ulnerable children
and their families, including those affected by emergencies. Strategies include
(a) increasing government capacity to coordinate and deliver social protection
services; (b) assuring that the most vulnerable households and individuals re ceive
appropriate safety net transfers; (c) building the capacity of relevant stakeholders to
manage social welfare cases, monitor residential facilities and promote family -based
care; (d) increasing birth registration; and (e) enhancing safe and secure
environments for survivors and children at risk of violence, harmful traditional
practices, exploitation, discrimination, abuse and neglect.
37. Child justice. This sub-component will work to ensure that laws and justice
systems, both formal and informal, are responsive to the rights and needs of boys
and girls, including those affected by emergencies. It will focus on (a) expanding
widespread recognition of and respect for children’s rights and children’s
participation in decision-making processes; (b) strengthening systems to ensure that
all girls and boys who come into contact with the law and security institutions are
treated in a manner that is appropriate to their age and gender, with specific
emphasis on underlying causes of widespread sexual violence against children and
appropriate legal and protective responses for survivors; (c) preventing violations of
children’s rights by providing boys and girls with adequate protection, including
through involvement with traditional and religious leaders on prev ention of child
abuse (reduction in harmful traditional practices) and in generating an environment
for positive adolescent development; and (d) involving girls and boys in leadership
and peace-building efforts within their communities.
38. Policy advocacy, communication for development and partnerships. This
programme component will provide cross-cutting support to all components and
enable UNICEF to fulfil its leading role on children’s rights. It will advocate for
implementation of the Children’s Law Act of Liberia and related child-friendly
policies and strategies, while calling for increased government investment in health,
education and WASH. To accelerate results in child survival and development,
UNICEF will operationalize communication for development strategies. These will
work to empower communities through dialogue and efforts to address behaviours
of rights-holders and duty-bearers, focused on adoption of a basket of key health
practices and expanded use of services by rights-holders. The component will
continue to strengthen partnerships with the media, civil society, communities,
children, the private sector, international development partners and donors. UNICEF
will engage new partners, including traditional and religious leaders, to promote

10

positive transitions from childhood to adolescence and address female genital
cutting.
39. Children affected by AIDS and adolescent HIV prevention. This
sub-component will also support mainstreaming and awareness of HIV through all
programmes. UNICEF will work with other United Nations agencies and partners
through a joint programme to increase public awareness on prevention of HIV and
AIDs. Specific results contributing to focus area 3 of the medium -term strategic
plan (children and AIDS) are covered in the summary results matrix and
intermediate results.
40. Gender. This sub-component will support issues identified in the forthcoming
gender map for Liberia, produced by the African Women’s Development Fund,
which could help establish priorities in the government’s final EGDS/PRS2. This
will complement work on maternal and adolescent reproductive health, girls’
education, life skills and the transition from childhood to adolescence. UNICEF will
collaborate with other United Nations agencies promoting gender budgeting. It will
promote use of sex-disaggregated data and gender analysis from sector programmes,
together with women’s involvement in local committees.
41. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. This programme component will aid
development of evidence with a focus on equity by supporting the Government to
develop systems for collecting, analysing and disseminating data disaggregated by
geographic location, sex, age and disability. It will continue to work with the
Government on the decentralized LiberiaInfo to promote a national and subnational
data repository on key social indicators.
42. UNICEF will also work with the Government to produce and regularly update
the Child Well-being Index, map distribution of services and results, and strengthen
national capacity to manage country-led evaluation systems. This will further
strengthen equity and evidence-based programming and reporting on the most
disadvantaged children and families. The drive for equity will be further accentuated
by community-based monitoring, working with local committees as part of
government monitoring systems. These will be linked with information from major
surveys, with a focus on gender, disability and inclusion of underserved areas.
Taking advantage of the new fibre-optic connection, innovation and technology will
be encouraged across programmes in service-delivery monitoring. Investments in
knowledge management and dissemination, internally and within the Government,
will support UNICEF commitment to be a knowledge leader for child ren while
meeting the demand for evidence to replicate successful programmes.
43. Cross-sectoral. This component will ensure effective and efficient programme
implementation through support services in administration, financial management,
information technology, human resources management, security and supply and
logistics.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
44. The programme is designed in the context of Vision 2030, EGDS/PRS2, the
medium-term expenditure framework, the United Nations Development Framework
(UNDAF) and its action plan under Delivering as One, existing government
policies, particularly decentralization, and the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.

11

45. Through consultations led by the Government, the UNDAF id entified 17
outcome-level results; 8 of them are directly linked with the country programme
2013-2017, as shown in the summary results matrix.
Relationship to international priorities
46. The country programme embodies the guiding principles of the Con vention on
the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child. In addition, programme strategies and planned results are guided by the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, A
World Fit for Children, the Millennium Declaration, Millennium Development
Goals, Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, Accra Agenda for Action, Hyogo
Framework for Action, and the New Deal signed in Busan. The key results areas
correspond to all five focus areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan and
draw on the four-pronged approach in the Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS
campaign. Environmental sustainability will be integrated into relevant programme
components.
Major partnerships
47. Key partners are relevant line ministries under the overall coordination of the
Ministry of Finance and Development Planning. Partnerships will be strengthened
with communities and community-based organizations, using international and
national NGOs as intermediaries where appropriate. In the spirit of Delivering as
One, UNICEF will actively partner with United Nations agencies (UNDP, WFP,
UNFPA, WHO, United Nations Mission in Liberia and the World Bank) to achieve
national development priorities under the UNDAF action plan. Multilateral and
bilateral stakeholders working in areas affecting children will remain valued
partners. Global partnerships will be harnessed to leverage resources for children.
UNICEF will work with various stakeholder forums such as the WASH Compact,
Child Protection Network and the decentralized county and district education
boards.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. The Ministry of Finance and Development Planning coordinates the One
United Nations programme and the UNICEF country programme. Programme
implementation and management will be the responsibility of relevant government
agencies and civil society partners.
49. UNICEF will monitor programme implementation, following the monitoring
and evaluation strategy endorsed by the country office in 2011. Further investment
will be made in evaluations focused on human rights and equity and in enabling the
Government to generate an equity analysis of the 2013 LDHS. The five -year
Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will incorporate key studies, surveys and
evaluations to assess progress of programme interventions and results achieved. It
will also track progress using key monitoring indicators described in the CPD and
UNDAF results matrices, drawing where possible on government data monitoring
systems.
50. To ensure an equity focus during programme interventions, UNICEF will track
changes in the Child Well-being Index, including by monitoring selected gender -

12

sensitive indicators by county. These will cover major areas of children’s
vulnerability, including disabilities and HIV/AIDS, where feasible.
51. UNDAF action plan reviews, including annual, midterm and end -of-cycle
reviews, will be conducted to monitor progress against planned results and
disseminate lessons learned. Effective multi-agency joint monitoring visits will be
organized with the Government, and will include a focus on inclusion. These review
missions and their documentation will facilitate replication of sound models and
strengthen programme coordination.

13

