Libya
Country programme document
2013-2014

The draft country programme document for Libya
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.33) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 second regular session (11-14
September 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 8 February 2013.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Libya is in the midst of a historic political, economic and social transition
following the overthrow of the previous government in 2011. Prior to the conflict,
Libya was recognized as an upper-middle-income country. It had made good
economic and social progress in the last several decades, benefiting both children
and women. In 2009, the country ranked 55 out of 182 countries on the Human
Development Index, and it was reportedly on track to achieve many of the
Millennium Development Goal targets. There was a lack of disaggregated data,
however, and limited information on disparities.
2.
Moreover, as of early 2012, the full extent of the damage and impact of the
2011 conflict had not yet been fully assessed, particularly in terms of infrastructure
and delivery of basic services and systems, specifically health and education.
Information was also lacking on socioeconomic vulnerabilities as well as the
effectiveness and sustainability of the large-scale public subsidies provided under
the previous regime, including heavy subsidies on food and energy commod ities.
The Libya Flash Appeal 2011 reported an estimated 2.5 million migrant workers
during the previous regime; an estimated 1 million of these workers left the country
during the upheaval. This has resulted in substantial human resource gaps in social
service sectors, and state institutions need strengthening.
3.
Libya has a young population; approximately one third of its estimated
5.7 million people are under the age of 18. The former government had provided
free comprehensive health care to its citizens, leading to improvements in child and
maternal health in the last decade. Major gains have been made in reducing under five child mortality rates, down from 47 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 17 per
1,000 live births in 2010. 1 It is believed that neonatal mortality, which had not
declined significantly, was a major component of infant mortality. The conflict
resulted in structural damage to the health sector and significant disruption in the
availability and distribution of staff and medical supplies.
4.
Early childhood development and pre-primary education need attention: the
2011 Global Monitoring Report of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) noted that the 2006 gross enrolment ratio in
pre-primary education was just 9 per cent for both girls and boys. Routine data from
the Ministry of Education suggest good progress in access to basic education but
with gaps in quality. During the 2011 conflict, around 33 per cent of schools were
damaged and 24 per cent were used for military or humanitarian purposes. 2
5.
The country lacks comprehensive and disaggregated data on key child
protection issues, including violence and abuse against children, child labour and
exploitation, birth registration, children in contact with the law and migrant
children. Institutional capacities to address these issues are also lacking. For
example in Sirte, a city severely affected by the conflict, the Department of Social
Affairs has a cadre of 47, but only 25 positions were filled as of Ma rch 2012, and
only 4 of them were social workers.
__________________
1
2

2

UNICEF, State of the World’s Children, 2012.
Preliminary results of the Nationwide School Assessment 2011-2012; implemented by the
Ministry of Education, UNICEF, and the Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development
(ACTED).

6.
A review of juvenile justice legislation by the Ministry of Justice in 2008
revealed the need to ensure more coherent and integrated application of the laws. A
draft Children’s Act was under discussion in the Libyan Parliament in late 2010, but
it has not yet been approved. Libya has ratified 12 international conventions and
treaties, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Libya submitted its
third and fourth combined periodic reports to the Committee on the Rights of the
Child in 2009, and the discussion on them is scheduled for 2013. Upon accession to
the Convention in 1993, Libya established the High Committee for Childhood,
which was mandated to oversee the welfare of children. In 2007, it was annexed to
the Department of Family and Childhood in the Ministry of Social Affairs. The
Ministry is currently re-establishing, with UNICEF technical support, the High
Committee for Childhood, and is seeking to amend and update the combined
periodic reports already submitted to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
7.
The conflict in 2011 killed or maimed a number of children and left many
areas heavily contaminated by explosive remnants of war. 3 Small arms and light
weapons are widespread; children continue to be killed and injured by their
widespread use. Of the estimated 70,000 people internally displaced by the conflict,
approximately 20,000 are children, many of whom are not attending school.
Although the conflict is officially over, sporadic outbreaks of violence have
continued to plague Libya as of early 2012, creating localized humanitarian needs,
affecting mostly ethnic minorities in and around the cities of Kufra, Sabha and
Ghadames.
8.
Over the past decades, working women in Libya gained the right to maternity
leave and employer-provided child-care centres. Article 91 of the Law on Work
states that there should be no salary discrimination between men and wo men if both
are qualified for the same job. In 1984, a Family Law was passed. While at least
parts of the legal framework are quite progressive regarding women ’s rights, much
more must be learned and understood about gender-related inequalities and violence
and their links to social norms and practices.

The country programme, 2013 to 2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Knowledge generation and
monitoring for fulfilment of
children’s and adolescents’ rights
Sector policies for delivery of
quality social services
Cross-sectoral
Total

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

350

1 600

1 950

1 000

4 700

5 700

150

700

850

1 500

7 000

8 500

__________________
3

UNMAS/JMACT (Joint Mine Action Coordination Team)-Libya, Mine Action Appeal, 2012.

3

Reasons for the short-duration CPD submission
9.
UNICEF was present in Libya from 1994 to 2005 and since then has supported
the country as a non-resident agency. Through its response to the 2011 humanitarian
emergency, UNICEF addressed critical needs of children and adolescents, especially
in water and sanitation, psychosocial counselling, monitoring child rights violations
and education. This humanitarian response was provided in close coordination with
the United Nations Humanitarian Country Team and was delivered initially from the
UNICEF regional office for the Middle East and North Africa in Jordan as well as
from UNICEF country offices in Egypt and Tunisia. The focus then shifted to
delivering support within Libya itself. This was coordinated first from Benghazi and
later from Tripoli, managed through the regional office. A full-fledged office was
established in April 2012 with the appointment of a country director.
10. In high-level meetings in Paris and New York in September 2011,
representatives of the country’s temporary governing body, the National Transitional
Council, presented a vision for restoring normalcy in Libya. One of its goals was the
assurance of people’s well-being through the adequate and equitable provision of
basic services. On 23 October 2011, the National Transitional Council d eclared
Libya liberated. In late November 2011, a provisional Council of Ministers was
formed to prepare the country for elections and a transition towards the rule of law
and a democratic political system. The interim cabinet identified the Government ’s
immediate priorities as public security, stability, payment of salaries in arrears to
public sector workers and provision of basic services, including education.
11. Under the road map for the transition period, the interim government’s plans
call for transferring power to an elected assembly by mid-2012, following the
election scheduled for July 2012. After this, a new prime minister is to be
nominated, a constitution drafted and a referendum held on the new constitution,
leading to general elections in 2013. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and the United Nations country team are supporting the Libyan authorities during
this transitional period. The government’s medium-term priorities include capacity
building for public service administrators in sector reform and planning, enhancing
technical expertise in line ministries and developing sound legislation and laws.
12. Within the framework of the 1994 Letter of Understanding and the 2005 Basic
Cooperation Agreement between UNICEF and the government, regular
consultations restarted in September 2011 on the evolving partnership between the
new Libyan authorities and UNICEF. These focused on the priorities of the line
ministries and stakeholders at subnational level. Effective relations have been buil t
particularly in the planning, education and social welfare sectors. Given the need for
better social statistics to inform planning and for more data and information on the
situation of children and adolescents, the 2013-2014 country programme aims to
support the transition from a humanitarian intervention towards a medium -term
development programme, anticipated to be initiated in 2015. A short -term CPD for
the period 2013 to 2014 is proposed in response to the Government ’s request, and is
based on the Government’s priorities and on the United Nations’ strategic
framework to support the Government in achieving its objectives.
Programme components, results and strategies
13. The overall objective of the 2013-2014 country programme of cooperation is
to support the Government of Libya in the short term as it evolves beyond the

4

current humanitarian context and to initiate the process of incorporating the rights of
children and adolescents into the national transition and initial reform agenda. The
programme will seek to assist the Government in strengthening the realization of
children’s rights by positioning them at the centre of national and subnational
policies, programmes and budgets. It will pay particular attention, in close
coordination with government authorities, to mapping and proposing effective
solutions to address vulnerabilities as the essential contribution to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals with equity and building a cohesive and inclusive
society that will eventually offer equal opportunities to all Libyan children. Within
this context and based on the sectoral mandates of other development partners,
UNICEF priorities are knowledge management and social policies as well as
education and child protection policies.
14. The programme has two components: (a) knowledge generation and
monitoring for fulfilment of children’s and adolescents’ rights; and (b) sector
policies for delivery of quality social services. These components will contribute to
the following strategic results by the end of 2014:
(a) National capacities for data gathering and management of evidence based, child-focused social policy, planning and budgeting are enhanced with an
equity focus;
(b) Standards and systems are developed for reforms and policies directed at
early childhood development and inclusive, quality basic education, with an
emphasis on the most vulnerable children;
(c)
policies.

Legislation and child protection systems are developed and reflected in

15. Additional responses demanded by localized humanitarian crises will be
integrated into these results.
16. Using a human rights-based approach, the country programme include the
following strategies: (a) enhancement of national institutional capacities to
formulate child-friendly social policies; (b) collaboration with centres of excellence
for knowledge generation and knowledge management as a basis for evidence -based
advocacy and communication for development; (c) documentation, dissemination
and exchange of good practices through North-South and South-South cooperation;
and (d) capacity development for disaster risk reduction and emergency
preparedness and response.
Programme components
17. Knowledge generation and monitoring for fulfilment of children’s and
adolescents’ rights. This component will support the Government to address
inequities and disparities in access to essential social services, especially those
affecting children. To strengthen the evidence base for the required actions, this
component aims to enhance national capacities to collect, analyse and disseminate
disaggregated data and to monitor and assess the effectiveness of social protection
systems, producing the evidence to formulate effective policies. Innovative
approaches to social protection and improved budgeting for childr en will be
emphasized. The programme will contribute to analysis of institutional
responsibilities and increased resources and incentive mechanisms essential for
realizing the rights of children and adolescents in Libya.

5

18. Results from this component will support the Ministry of Planning, in
coordination with social sector ministries and development partners, to update social
indicators through a comprehensive nationwide household survey. It will also
support surveys covering specific topics such as knowledge, attitudes, behaviours
and practices of adolescents (aged 10 to 18). These results will be achieved through
targeted consultations, partnership mapping and capacity building. Systemic reviews
will be conducted in 2013 and 2014.
19. Sector policies for delivery of quality social services. This component aims
at strengthening government capacity and advocating for increased resource
allocation for the delivery of quality social services while influencing policies at
national level. Emphasis will be given to young children, marginalized ethnic
groups, displaced children and girls, boys and adolescents with special needs or
disabilities.
20. A subcomponent on education will support the development of national
standards and systems that translate into inclusive sector plans and policies for
improving administration and accountability. It will focus on strengthening the
education management information system through data use for sector reform
planning and in monitoring the implementation of inclusive education policies for
children and adolescents. UNICEF will support technical assistance, policy dialogue
and advocacy to enhance child-friendly early childhood practices by institutions and
parents. It will also support improvements to teaching and learning in basic
education. UNICEF will also assist in preparing a curriculum framework,
strengthening pre-service and in-service teacher training, and establishing quality
assurance mechanisms. Strategies include institutional capacity building,
communication for development, partnership strengthening and facilitation of
international networking for exchange of good practices.
21. A subcomponent on child protection will support the Government to improve
its child protection legislation and policy frameworks. It will also aid strengthening
of child protection systems and response to violence against children and
adolescents, including armed conflict. The subcomponent will emphasize research
into key social and cultural norms that harm children; mapping of formal child
protection mechanisms, systems and capacities within the judiciary, police and
social sectors and initiation of a process to align national legislation with
international standards. Advocacy, institutional capacity development, engagement
with civil society and child participation will be critical strategies to achieve these
results. Mechanisms such as the High Council for Childhood will be supported to
ensure consistent national intersectoral monitoring and reporting on the fulfilment
of children’s and adolescents’ rights.
22. These two sub-components will support humanitarian and recovery-related
actions aimed at strengthening delivery of social services to affected children during
and after localized emergencies. National and local counterparts will be s upported
through capacity building and service delivery for preparedness and response.
Coordination mechanisms will also be enhanced for emergency response and
recovery for children.
23. Cross-sectoral. This component will cover effective, efficient and integrated
management and coordination of the country programme. This component will also
provide technical support for gender equality and communication.

6

Relationship to international priorities
24. The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child are the guiding principles of the country
programme. The Millennium Declaration, Millennium Development Goals and A
World Fit for Children outcome document have also guided the programme design,
strategies and planned results. The proposed programme component results
contribute to the focus areas 1, 2, 4, and 5 of the UNICEF medium-term strategic
plan.
25. While the ultimate long-term vision is fulfilment of the rights of all girls and
boys in Libya in full accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols, the country programme has been built around the national
priorities identified by the interim Government and the road map for the transitional
period.
Major partnerships
26. The main UNICEF counterpart will be the Ministry of Planning. UNICEF will
also work closely with the ministries of Education, Social Affairs, Justice, Interior,
Defence and Finance; the Bureau of National Statistics; and academic bodies and
research institutes. Engagement with the emerging civil society sector and
non-governmental organizations and promotion of their participation in the ongoing
national transition and reform processes will be a key partnership strategy.
Collaboration with other United Nations agencies and other development partners —
including international non-governmental organizations, faith-based groups,
academia, the private sector and the media — will be important for coherent,
coordinated programme implementation, advocacy and resource mobilization.
27. UNICEF will work to increase aid effectiveness through technical assistance to
government-led sector coordination mechanisms. UNICEF will also improve
harmonization of programme delivery through joint programming among Unite d
Nations agencies, which are developing a framework of support to the Government
in five strategic areas, which UNICEF will co-lead with the agencies indicated:
social services (with the World Health Organization); public administration and
governance, and justice and rule of law (with the United Nations Development
Programme); economic recovery (with the World Bank); and culture and tourism
(with UNESCO).
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
28. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Planning will be
responsible for coordination, monitoring and evaluation of this programme of
cooperation. The Government and UNICEF will collaborate on a joint review of the
performance and results of this short-duration programme at the end of 2013. An
Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, to be developed by the Government and
UNICEF, will specify the jointly agreed studies, surveys and evaluations to be
undertaken during the country programme.

7

