The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Country programme document
2010-2015

The draft country programme document for The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (E/ICEF/2009/P/L.12) was
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its
2009 annual session (8-10 June 2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2009 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2009.

†

Basic data
(2007, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.5

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

17

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)

2

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2005)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2004)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)
Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

4
92/92
98
100
89
<0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)
GNI per capita (US$)

6
3 460

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

95

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

96

†

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org .

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Since independence in 1991, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has
made steady progress in ensuring political stability and economic growth in a multi ethnic State. A political settlement of the inter-ethnic conflict in 2001 was
established through the Ohrid Agreement. The country was granted European Union
(EU) candidate status in December 2005 but has not yet received a date to start the
negotiation process for EU accession. Since 2003, the country has enjoyed real
gross domestic product growth of up to 5.3 per cent per year, reaching a gross
national income per capita of $3,460, compared with $1,763 in 2000. The current
global financial crisis, however, may act as a break on economic progress.
2.
National statistics reflect encouraging progress in achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and in improving the situation of children and
women. For example, according to United Nations estimates, the under-five
mortality rate fell from 38 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 17 per 1,000 live births in
2007, and a similar trend has been noted with the infant mortality rate and the
maternal mortality ratio.
3.
However, the social-economic agenda for children remains unfinished, and
there are three interlinked challenges to the fulfilment of the righ ts of children and
women: continuing high rates of child poverty and social exclusion; enduring
disparities in access to services and in health and education outcomes; and poor
linkages among accountabilities, policies and spending.
4.
First, increasing levels of poverty show that not all citizens, children in
particular, are fully benefiting from recent positive economic developments. In
2007, more than 60 per cent of households living under the relative poverty line,
compared to 41 per cent in 1997, were households with children. Unemployment
remains high, at approximately 34 per cent, and disproportionately affects young

2

people (age 15-24) who face an unemployment rate of 54 per cent. With the recent
global economic downturn, these statistics may deterior ate further.
5.
Social exclusion, particularly among ethnic minorities such as the Roma is
another concern, as are disparities in access to services. The United Nations
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination noted that it is “deeply
concerned” about the difficulties that some Roma experience in obtaining
registration and other personal documents related to the provision of social services.
6.
In education, the World Bank has noted substantial differences in the amount
of spending on schools with different ethnic compositions. Regarding primary
school completion, children from the poorest quintile have a 62 per cent completion
rate, against a 99 per cent rate in the richest quintile. The worst indicators in
education are observed among the Roma, with only 61 per cent of children attending
primary education (58 per cent girls). The primary completion rate is only 45 per
cent, against the national average of 83 per cent. Children with disabilities are
another group that tends to miss out on education: it is estimated that only 10 per
cent of such children are in school. Only 11 per cent of all children 4 -6 years old
attend pre-school. This is considerably lower among ethnic minorities; only 4 per
cent of Roma and 2 per cent of Albanian children 4-6 years old attend pre-school.
Low scores in international comparative examinations of learning achievement
indicate that accelerated efforts are needed to address issues related to the relevance
and quality of primary school education. Moreover, authoritie s have noted with
concern recent reports of ethnic-based segregation and violence in some schools.
7.
Infant and child mortality rates vary significantly, depending on wealth
quintile and ethnic background. High vaccination coverage with no gender
disparities has been sustained over the past 10 years. However, there persist pockets
of unimmunized children, predominantly from rural areas and from Roma and
ethnic Albanian communities. While HIV prevalence remains low, at 0.1 per cent,
maintaining that level will require sustained effort.
8.
According to the 2005-2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS), almost
70 per cent of children aged 2-14 years (72.7 percent for boys and 64.6 percent for
girls) experienced at least one form of psychological or physic al punishment from a
household member, with 16 per cent subjected to severe physical punishment. Roma
children as well as children from the poorest families have experienced severe
physical punishment more than other children. Rates of domestic violence ar e high.
The reporting and referral of cases of domestic violence and of child abuse are
limited.
9.
Following the 2000 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights
of the Child, the country adopted a new code that regulates all aspects of juvenil e
justice. However, the degree of specialization of the system remains inadequate. A
2007 UNICEF regional study found that the country continues to have a high rate of
children in conflict with the law. The Committee report also highlighted that
responses emphasized punishment and custodial sentencing rather than prevention
and rehabilitation.
10. With approximately 400 children and adolescents in eight public institutions,
the Government is keen to accelerate reform of the child care system. Efforts are
under way to close or transform all existing residential institutions for children with
special needs, and in parallel to develop community- and family-based alternatives

3

such as small group homes and foster families. However, the Committee
recommended that more effort be made by the State to integrate children with
disabilities into educational and recreational programmes. Ten per cent of children
2-9 years old have at least one reported disability, with higher levels among Roma
children and poor children.
11. A final challenge is the weak linkages among accountabilities, planning and
expenditures, which hinder some policy commitments from being transformed into
programmatic actions at both the central and local levels. As part of the Ohrid
Agreement, municipalities have increased responsibilities in the provision of social
services. However, while the devolution of responsibilities from central government
to municipalities has contributed to the greater participation of all ethnic groups in
governance, it has made the effective support to the realization of children‟s rights
more complex. This complexity is compounded by the fact that municipalities differ
in size, economic power, physical infrastructure and human resources.
12. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made progress in
establishing child rights monitoring mechanisms; however, capacities of national
and local bodies are limited. The Committee has encouraged the State to increase its
support for, and cooperation with, non-governmental organizations as part of the
State‟s obligation to implement the Convention. The Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women has welcomed legislative measures taken to
combat violence against women but has noted its concern about the high preval ence
of violence against women, including domestic violence.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2009
Key results achieved
13. The beginning of the country programme coincided with the country receiving
EU candidacy status, which provided the opportunity to link child rights principles
and standards to the accession process. The programme supported the development
of normative frameworks, including laws, policies, and standards; it also generated
knowledge on children to inform policies and national strategies, and strengthened
data collection and monitoring mechanisms on child rights, building the capacity of
service providers and improving the quality of service s for children.
14. Normative work contributed to the development of several key policies and
frameworks: the Agenda for Action for Children and the Skopje Declaration in 2005
as the national framework for implementing child rights; the National Early
Childhood Development (ECD) Policy aiming to provide diversifi ed quality ECD
services and universal access to early learning opportunities for young children;
Early Learning and Development Standards (ELDS), now to be implemented
nationwide; and Child-Friendly Schools (CFS) standards, which are already in place
in 350 primary schools throughout the country, benefiting some 250,000 children.
15. A comprehensive juvenile justice code, adopted in 2007 with the programme ‟s
technical support, now governs all aspects of juvenile justice, and is being applied
by courts and social service providers. The cooperation also enabled the
development and adoption of the national de-institutionalization strategy, which led

4

to a sharp increase in the number of community-based services. Day-care centres for
children with disabilities grew from just 9 in 2005 to 22 in 2009.
16. New evidence that helped to shape policies and resource allocation for
children included a Child Poverty Study in 2007, which influenced the Government
to make a commitment to allocate EU funds for specific childre n‟s issues. The State
Statistics Office included child poverty in its routine budget household survey,
which informs the planning and budgeting strategies of all Ministries. The
2005-2006 MICS for the first time provided disaggregated data on specific chil drelated indicators. These are being used not only by line Ministries but also by the
European Commission and World Bank. A qualitative research on most -at-risk
adolescents (MARA) shaped the National AIDS Strategy, which prioritized HIV
prevention among adolescents.
17. One of the main concerns of the Committee on the Rights of the Child was
addressed with the establishment of the National Commission on Child Rights in
2007. There is now a functioning national institutional mechanism that monitors the
implementation of the Convention, prepares progress reports on the implementation
of the National Action Plan for Children‟s Rights, and holds annual Government
sessions devoted to children‟s issues.
18. All 250,000 primary school students now learn Life Skills-Based Education,
helping them to develop skills essentials for their daily lives, including skills
promoting understanding and respecting the multicultural and multi -ethnic nature of
their society.
Lessons learned
19. UNICEF support for decentralization reform was an important element of the
previous country programme. However, one lesson that emerged from a joint
UNICEF-United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) decentralization
assessment in 2007 was that an unclear structure of accountability link ing local- and
central-level authorities had contributed to the slow pace of reform. The next
programme cycle would need to address accountability issues, scale up municipal level capacity in local planning and budgeting, and develop minimum standards for
basic social services at local level. For this reason, greater emphasis has been placed
on these strategies in the new programme.
20. UNICEF is a leader in promoting ELDS in the region. The programme of
cooperation made headway in advocacy efforts and technical input, to the point
where ELDS moved beyond the development stage to a „validation‟ stage of the
strategy. The recent validation of the ELDS showed that, on the whole, young
children do not receive the care and stimulation for development that they n eed to
reach their potential. Children 0-6 years old surpass international standards for
physical health and motor development; however, there are apparent delays in
cognitive, social and emotional development among children 3 -6 years old who do
not attend kindergarten. This suggests that the vast majority of children (only 11 per
cent participate in early education) are not developmentally ready for schooling.
This situation can have serious implications for their future educational performance
and therefore for the efficiency of educational spending in the country. The evidence
called for increased coverage of early educational opportunities, and counselling
and support for families, both of which are priorities in the new country programme.

5

In order to do this effectively, accelerated and expanded intersectoral efforts are
required to address the holistic needs of young children.
21. In the previous programme of cooperation, UNICEF supported a Roma
education project that emphasized inclusion and integrated community-based
approaches. A 2008 evaluation of the project, supported by the Council of Europe
Development Bank, found that the outreach activities in Roma communities,
teacher-training and parental involvement in schools represented an effective and
sustainable model. Some 8,000 primary education children benefited, and over 400
Roma students out of the school system were enrolled. This model of inclusion went
beyond the Roma project to inform the CFS approach and standards that are being
mainstreamed in the education system through the ongoing reform. It will be further
consolidated to incorporate the prevention of violence and promotion of life skills,
particularly inter-cultural and inter-ethnic tolerance, and will be scaled up by the
Government in the new programme of cooperation.

The country programme, 2010-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

System strengthening for child rights

2 475

8 760

11 235

Child rights monitoring and social policy

1 665

3 000

4 665

360

240

600

4 500

12 000

16 500

Programme

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
22. The 2007 midterm review and the joint United Nations strategy review in 2006
provided guidance on the direction of the programme. The process was managed in
parallel with the development of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF), and was fully consistent with the framework. The country
programme contributes to two out of the three UNDAF outcomes, namely, social
inclusion (led by UNICEF), and local governance and decentralization.
23. Evidence for programme design was provided by the Situation Analysis of
children and women, the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child and the Government‟s report on the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In late 2008, the
Government and UNICEF reached agreement on the adjustments that needed to be
made in the current programme. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs coordinated
consultation with the line Ministries, and consolidated recommendations and
feedback.

6

Goals, key results and strategies
24. The 2010-2015 country programme will address three main development
challenges facing children: child poverty, disparities and social exclusion. It will
help to address the key bottleneck of limited capacity at both local and national
levels in developing and implementing evidence-based policies, programmes and
budgets for children, and will promote multi-ethnic cohesion through the education
system.
25. The programme will contribute to the following strategic results:
(a) government resource allocation to basic social services, including for excluded
and marginalized children, increased by 10 per cent; (b) primary education
attendance rate among excluded children improved by 20 per cent; (c) regional
disparities in key child health indicators reduced, and peri -natal and infant mortality
decreased by 20 per cent; (d) the ratio of children in institutional care to children in
alternative family- or community-based care reduced from 2.6/1 to 1/1, and the
number of children in residential care reduced by 30 per cent; and (e) the number of
juvenile offenders who are diverted to non-punitive and prevention services
increased by 50 per cent.
26. The programme will meet the recommendations of the Situation Analysis
through support to system strengthening, capacity-building and good governance in
the areas of maternal and child health, early childhood learning, education and child
protection. It will achieve results through two programme components, System
Strengthening for Child Rights, and Child Rights Monitoring and Social Policy. The
programme will employ a mix of strategies, including: institutiona l capacity
development at national and local level; specific focus on socially excluded and
vulnerable children; innovative and evidence-based models to support public
administration reforms in health, education and social protection; partnership
building with civil society organizations, media and private sector.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The programme has been designed to support the country‟s social inclusion
agenda for children to move forward. It will support the key dev elopment priorities
outlined in the National Development Plan 2008-2013, which include building
human capital through formal and non-formal education, improvement of health and
nutritional status, the reduction of disparities and support for better public
administration at both national and municipal level. The programme is also in line
with the National Plan for Action for Children 2006 -2015 and sector specific
national strategies.
28. UNICEF has been designated the lead agency in achieving UNDAF Outcome
One which aims to increase access to quality basic services for the socially excluded
and marginalized population by 2015. The programme will complement the work of
four United Nations agencies to achieve UNDAF Outcome Two for strengthening
the local and regional governance capacity to promote equitable development and
inter-ethnic cohesion.
Relationship to international priorities
29. The country programme will contribute to the realization of the Millennium
Development Goal commitments to lowering poverty levels, promoting universal

7

education and gender equality, and reducing disparities in health and child
protection. By supporting access to quality education, promoting healthy lives, and
protecting children against violence, exploitation and abuse, th e programme is also
fully aligned with the goals of A World Fit for Children. The programme is also
informed by the Copenhagen criteria, including those pertaining to the respect for
and protection of minorities, and the need to address social exclusion an d to ensure
social protection systems consistent with principles of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and international standards.
30. To this end, the programme will support the Government‟s efforts to analyse
and address the scope and causes of the barriers to children‟s full enjoyment of their
rights, an approach consistent with the EU “Communication Towards a European
Strategy on the Rights of the Child”.

Programme components
System strengthening for child rights
31. While State funding for the social sector has grown, the increase has not been
accompanied by the development of capacities for evidence -based planning and
efficient monitoring of equitable use of the funding, both at national and local
levels. In the health sector, there is still insufficient emphasis on preventative and
primary care, and systems for continuous medical education of health professionals
are limited. More than half of the population utilizes ambulance/emergency care as
the first contact with the health care system. ECD policies and standards are in
place, but provision of these services remains limited. State funding for ECD
favours those municipalities that have existing infrastructure. The education system
needs to address the relatively poor performance of students based on international
assessments. Investment in the areas that directly contribute to improved teaching
and learning, such as pre-service and in-service training, has been insufficient.
Schools also lack mechanisms to prevent ethnic segregation a nd violence in schools.
Protection of at-risk and vulnerable children needs strengthening at normative level
(legislation, policies, standards, protocols) and at the service -delivery level. A
standardized national data collection system for child protectio n needs to be further
developed, as does the system to monitor quality of social services delivered to
children. The administration of juvenile justice in the country is hampered by the
lack of skilled and trained professionals and the shortage of material s and financial
resources. While the Government has adopted a strategy for de -institutionalization,
its scope is limited and does not take a holistic view of child care system reform.
32. In early childhood learning and quality and relevant education, ther e are three
expected key results: (a) at least 30 percent of primary schools implement
mechanisms and standards for inclusion of children regardless of ethnicity, gender,
disability, and socio-economic background; (b) all primary school teachers use the
updated teaching methodologies that improve learning outcomes for children; and
(c) 40 per cent of young children (0-6 years) have early learning opportunities.
33. The programme component will support government efforts in the
development and implementation of standards and mechanisms for inclusion of
children in primary education system, revision of pre-school education curriculum
and capacity development of ECD staff and primary school teachers. Support will
be given to the integration of better parenting programmes for children 0-3 years old

8

in the health prevention programmes for implementation and monitoring of child
outcomes based on ELDS.
34. UNICEF will collaborate with the World Bank and United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), both of which have active programmes in the
education sector. Main partners will be: Ministry of Education and Science, Bureau
for Education Development (BED), Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Ministry
of Local Self-Government, municipalities and local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). UNICEF will also participate in a joint United Nations programme with
UNDP and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) to build inter-ethnic cohesion and tolerance.
35. In the area of health system strengthening, the programme component aims to
achieve the following: (a) all national Maternal and Child Health (MCH)
programmes have plans to address regional and local disparities in terms of child
health outcomes; (b) a total of 33 municipalities (40 per cent of all) that have the
lowest performance in child health outcomes have developed local action plans and
have allocated resources to improve their MCH outcomes by 20 per cent; and (c) at
least 50 per cent of government professionals working in MCH apply the updated
MCH guidelines.
36. The programme component will provide technical support for the development
of integrated MCH policies, (especially in the areas of immunization, nutrit ion,
peri-natal care, prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and paediatric
AIDS), reform of mother and child health, strengthening the capacity of public
health professionals in evidence-based planning, implementation and monitoring of
MCH-related policies and programmes at the national and lo cal levels. The key
partners include Ministry of Health, National Institute of Health Protection, the
World Health Organization (WHO), and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA).
37. In child protection, the component will aim for the following expecte d results:
(a) a functional juvenile justice system that is able to provide alternative measures
for children in conflict with the law; (b) at least 70 per cent of Centers for Social
Work (CSW) staff apply the child protection normative framework to preven t and
protect children at risk or victims of abuse and violence; (c) at least 30 per cent of
children at risk are provided with prevention programmes; (d) data on children in
need of special protection are collected by all CSWs based on a standardized syst em
and are used for planning and budgeting child protection services at the national and
local levels.
38. The programme component will support strengthening the child protection
system through development of a national strategy for child protection; provi de
standards for basic social services in line with international standards; and promote
models for alternatives to imprisonment, prevention of juvenile delinquency, and
alternatives to residential care. It will offer technical assistance for the developme nt
of a data collection system on child protection and building the capacity of CSW
staff in applying the normative framework, case management, and preventive and
protective service delivery.
39. UNICEF will partner with the Ministry of Labour and Social P olicy, Institute
for Social Activities, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of the Interior, the local NGOs. It

9

will also join the United Nations programme to address domestic violence, together
with UNDP, the United Nations Fund for Women (UNIFEM), UNFPA and WH O.
40. Regular resources will be used to build management and technical capacities,
develop policies, standards and protocols, support innovations and modelling, and
support key partnerships. Other resources will be mobilized to expand coverage and
increase the scope of capacity development.
Social policy and child rights monitoring
41. Evidence shows that relative child poverty is growing, and the economic
growth has not necessarily benefited children. Pro-poor policies and planning are
hampered by lack of disaggregated data, including for boys and girls, and there are
weak linkages among accountabilities, planning and expenditures at national and
local levels. Decentralized governance systems are at their infancy and require
support to enable them to take on the devolved responsibilities. Child rights
monitoring mechanisms, including the national child rights commission, media and
civil society organizations are weak, and the participation of young people,
including young girls, needs to be expanded and actively promoted.
42. The programme component will have three key results: (a) disaggregated data
analysis — including on gender — results in child poverty being addressed and
budgeted in the national social inclusion strategy; (b) at least 30 per cent o f
municipalities have developed gender-sensitive local plans for children, have
allocated budgets for them, and report on status of both girls and boys every year;
and (c) child rights monitoring institutions produce accurate and timely reports on
child rights.
43. This second programme expands the scope of the cooperation by supporting
social and economic policy analysis, focusing specifically on child poverty, on
analysis of disparities, including gender-based inequalities, and the impact of
budgetary allocations on children‟s lives. It will support Government and civil
society partners by strengthening child rights monitoring systems at all levels. The
component will closely link with the first one, but will focus on child rights
governance systems and capacities at national and local levels. It will support the
social sector ministries in results-based budgeting, generate knowledge and data on
socially excluded children, and build the capacity of municipalities in child - and
gender-friendly governance. Support to decentralization will also include the
development of funding mechanisms for the equitable provision of social services
based on minimum standards. The programme component will support capacity
development of the national child rights commission a nd civil society in child rights
monitoring and reporting, and support the inclusion of a child rights syllabus in the
training of journalists.
44. Under this component, UNICEF will work with, among others, the Ministry of
Finance on public finance management, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy on
social inclusion, the State Statistics Office on data collection, and the Ministry of
Local Self-Government and relevant municipalities on issues related to
decentralization, and with the EU and the United Nations system, as part of
collective efforts to support social inclusion.
45. Regular resources will be used for child rights monitoring, policy and budget
analysis, decentralized planning, and support of partnerships for children. Other

10

resources will be mobilized to expand coverage and increase the scope of capacity
development.
46. The cross-sectoral costs will cover the basic office operational costs,
including rent, utilities, transportation, security, telecommunications, and salaries of
some cross-sectoral staff.
Major partnerships
47. Activities at the community and municipal levels will be coordinated through
municipal governments, the Ministry of Local Self-Government, the Association of
Local Self-Government Units, relevant sectors in line ministries and local NGOs.
Partnerships will continue with major international development partners, including
with the EU in promotion of children‟s human rights in general and the rights of
minorities and excluded children in particular, the World Bank in so cial protection
reform and education system strengthening, and the sector-wide approach in human
capital (education, social policy, and health), a new initiative that involves all the
key actors and donors, including the EU, World Bank, and USAID. UNICEF will
also continue its partnership with the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency, USAID, and the Governments of Denmark, the Netherlands
and Norway, in order to coordinate technical inputs and leverage funds.
48. The programme will collaborate with Parliamentary groups on issues related to
child rights monitoring and budgetary allocations for children, and local and
international research institutions to support knowledge generation. UNICEF will
partner with two tertiary institutions and a professional media body to implement a
child rights syllabus for the media, as well as with the media and private sector for
raising awareness and leveraging funds for issues related to child rights, child
poverty and social inclusion.
49. UNICEF has been an active member of all United Nations inter-agency
committees established to oversee the implementation of the UNDAF, and will
participate in two joint programmes: Improving inter-ethnic dialogue and cohesion
in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (with UNDP and UNESCO); and
Prevention of domestic violence (with UNDP, UNFPA, WHO and UNIFEM).
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
50. Monitoring and evaluation activities will be systematized and managed
through the integrated monitoring and evaluation plan and coordinated with other
United Nations agencies through the UNDAF integrated monitoring and evaluation
framework. In order to promote a harmonized approach to data collection, research,
monitoring and evaluation, UNICEF will continue to work with the United Nations
working group on statistics.
51. Key indicators disaggregated by location, ethnicity and gender will cover the
following: pre-school attendance; inclusiveness and quality in primary education;
mother and child health promotion; adoption and implementation of normative
frameworks in the areas of social protection and juvenile justice; and capacities and
conditions for evidence-based planning, policy development and budgeting.
52. Progress against the indicators will be measured using data disaggregated by
sex, location, and socio-economic conditions. For indicators relating to law,
strategy, action plan or standards, sources of information will include the official

11

Government gazette and documents issued by the institution, parti cularly when it
documents specific actions that have been approved. For quantitative indicators,
periodic or annual publications by the State Statistics office, Ministries, and other
institutions responsible for collecting specific data will be used. For i ndicators
where no systematic data collection exists, the programme will use primary data
collection. Research activities, studies and evaluations will be used for generating
knowledge on the situation of children, providing evidence and support for
policymaking.
53. The programme will support the establishment of a State -led child-related
monitoring system. Through partnering with other players in the field (United
Nations agencies, the World Bank, European Commission, USAID), relevant
information, knowledge and experience regarding children will be identified. The
State Statistics Office will be supported in expanding its work on collecting,
disaggregating, systematizing and publishing relevant gender-sensitive child-related
data. Simultaneously, the policy makers at national and local levels will be
supported in developing capacities for applying a results-based approach to policy
development and budgeting. This will create demand for information which, along
with support to the National Commission for Child Rights to monitor
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the national plan
of action for children, will lead to sustainability in children rights monitoring.
54. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will coordinate the country progra mme, the
Annual Review meetings and the midterm review of the country programme in
2013. The various components will be managed in cooperation with the relevant line
ministries.

12

