E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
5 January 2015
Original: English
French
Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
First regular session 2015
3-5 February 2015
Item 5 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Madagascar
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Madagascar is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The draft CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $56,815,000
from regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $141,000,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
March 2015 to December 2019.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document reflects
comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was shared 12 weeks
before the 2015 first regular session of the Executive Board.

* E/ICEF/2015/1.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Programme rationale
1. Madagascar is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a gross national income
per capita of $440 (World Development Indicators 2014; 2013 data) and a ranking in 2014
of 155th of 187 countries in the Human Development Index. In 2013, 91 per cent of the
country’s 21 million people lived on less than $2 per day (Millennium Development Goal
(MDG) survey 2012–2013). Madagascar is emerging from a prolonged political crisis
accompanied by socio-economic decline, deterioration of social services and exacerbation of
household vulnerabilities to shocks.
2. Given its rich mineral and natural resource base, Madagascar has significant growth
potential, especially in the extractives sector. Yet, it also faces the associated risks of illegal
trade and exploitation. The island nation is exposed to the hazardous effects of climate change
and is extremely vulnerable to natural disasters. While Madagascar is subject to recurring
droughts, floods and locust plagues, and with 16 of the country’s 22 regions at risk ranks fifth
among countries most threatened by cyclones (Maplecroft 2012), its level of preparedness to
prevent and mitigate the effects of disasters is limited. The country is characterized by ethnic,
cultural and biological diversity, and by major socioeconomic, rural/urban and other
geographic disparities between the highlands and coastal areas.
3. Madagascar has a young (47 per cent under age 15) and largely rural population (83 per
cent, MDG survey 2012–2013). Under-five mortality declined from 72 to 62 per 1,000 live
births between 2008 and 2012 (Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2008–2009 and
MDG Survey 2012–2013), likely attributable to the implementation of community-based
child survival interventions with a special focus on hard-to-reach areas. At the same time,
neonatal mortality marginally increased from 24 to 26 per 1,000 live births. Neonatal
mortality accounts for 42 per cent of under-five deaths. Maternal mortality remains very high,
at 500 per 100,000 live births (The State of the World’s Children Report 2014) and is far from
the 127 per 100,000 live births MDG target; one third of maternal deaths are related to
teenage pregnancies. The percentage of children aged 12–23 months who were fully
vaccinated fell from 61.6 per cent in 2008 (DHS 2008–2009) to 51.1 per cent in 2012 (MDG
survey 2012–2013). The deterioration of the primary health care system, including
inadequate numbers and distribution of health personnel, shortages of medical supplies, and
the long distance and high cost of accessing services are major bottlenecks and barriers to
access and use of services (MDG survey 2012–2013). Significant and sustained investment
is needed to strengthen the health system and build on the gains made in reducing under-five
mortality. HIV prevalence remains low at 0.4 per cent among adults ages 15 to 49 (Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), 2013 data) and 0.2 per cent for young
men and young women aged 15 to 24 (UNAIDS 2013).
4. Madagascar has the fourth highest rate of chronic undernutrition rate in the world
(MDG survey 2012–2013). About half (47 per cent) of all children under age five are stunted.
Progress in tackling high stunting rates has been very slow over the past 20 years and
important disparities remain between urban areas (39 per cent) and rural areas (49 per cent),
and among regions, with the Central Highlands reporting stunting rates of more than 60 per
cent. The prevalence of wasting and underweight among children under age five is 8 per cent
and 32 per cent, respectively. Undernutrition is associated with poverty and food insecurity;
limited access to nutritious food; poor maternal nutrition and inadequate infant and young
child feeding practices often rooted in unfavourable social norms; recurrent childhood
illnesses and poor access to quality health services; and inadequate water, sanitation and
hygiene (WASH) provision, especially for the most deprived segments of the population.

2/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

5. Limited access to clean water and poor sanitation and hygiene practices are of particular
concern, especially given the link with chronic malnutrition. In global comparisons,
Madagascar ranks 4th from last in the use of safe water and 8th from last in access to
sanitation. Only 14 per cent of the population has access to improved sanitation facilities
(WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) 2014). Almost half (48 per cent) of
people living in rural areas practise open defecation. Only half of the overall population and
35 per cent of the rural population have access to improved water sources, with 38 per cent
of those in rural areas relying on surface water for drinking (JMP 2014).
6. Madagascar is no longer on track to achieve MDG 2, universal primary education. The
net primary enrolment rate decreased from 83 per cent in 2005 to 69 per cent in 2012 (MDG
survey 2012–2013). Repetition rates in primary school are 17 per cent and test scores in key
subjects such as mathematics have declined since 1998 from 59/100 to 40/100 reported in
2012 (Ministry of Education). Approximately 1.5 million primary-school-age children are
currently out of school and only 3 out of every 10 children who enrol complete primary
school (UNICEF 2012). The major barriers to education include outdated curricula, poorly
trained teachers and low quality of instruction (about two thirds of primary school teachers
have not received any formal training); limited number of school facilities; and increasing
costs of education.
7. Violence and exploitation of children are major protection concerns. Fourteen per cent
of girls aged 15 to 19 have reported being victims of sexual violence and 15 per cent have
reported being victims of physical violence (MDG survey 2012–2013). The Special
Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography has reported
increases in sexual exploitation of children, including through prostitution and sexual tourism
since the onset of the crisis (Report of the Special Rapporteur, 2013). Reporting rates are low
and prosecution of the perpetrators of violence against children inadequate, as is the
prevention of violence, and the provision of care and treatment for victims.
8. The practice of child marriage persists, with nearly half of women aged 20 to 24
reporting having been married before the age of 18. More than one third (37 per cent) of girls
aged 15–19 have started childbearing. Almost 1 in 4 (23 per cent) children aged 5 to 17 are
involved in economic activity.
9. Persistent poverty remains the main barrier to development in Madagascar. Limited
financial and human resource capacity in the social sector, limited access to large parts of the
country, and harmful practices rooted in traditional beliefs are among the major bottlenecks
to overcoming household vulnerability and expanding social service delivery.
10. Following a prolonged governance crisis, a new Government was formed in April 2014
following democratic elections held at the end of 2013, and a new National Development
Plan is currently being drafted to fill the void in which the country had been operating for the
past five years. The Government has outlined the fight against poverty, vulnerability and
insecurity, and the promotion of dialogue and reconciliation among key stakeholders as
overarching development objectives. Among the priorities to be elaborated in the Plan are
health and nutrition, education, water and sanitation, good governance and rule of law, and
social protection. The lifting of sanctions and restrictions on foreign aid that had been
imposed during the crisis has paved the way for donor re-engagement and aid investment.
11. The experience of the last country programme points to three main lessons that have
guided the design of the 2015–2019 country programme:
(a) The importance of continued programme engagement and using UNICEF programmes
as operational and programmatic bridging mechanisms in a restricted aid environment for

3/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

safeguarding gains made for children and women, ‘building back better’ and eventual
recovery of the social sectors.
(b) The need for deeper cross-sectoral analysis and understanding of social and cultural
norms that govern the behaviours and decisions of families and communities in an
anthropologically diverse context. The importance of using such information to customize
the design and implementation of strategies for behaviour change, demand creation and
community outreach.
(c) The fact that maintaining a strong focus on community-based interventions has proved
to be a key strategy in tackling the barriers to access and utilization of health services. This
has been demonstrated in the successful implementation of Integrated Community Case
Management interventions in community health centres and through improved capacity of
community health workers.

Programme priorities and partnerships
12. The 2015–2019 country programme will support national priorities in the new National
Development Plan as well as sectoral plans. By working with partners to address policy,
systems and service-delivery bottlenecks at the national, subnational and community levels,
the country programme will contribute to the achievement of equitable outcomes for the
poorest and hardest-to-reach children and families. The programme will pursue multipronged intersectoral strategies, including:
(a) Advocacy and technical support for the development of equity-focused and childfriendly policies and budgets, sector plans and frameworks, including development of the
first national social protection framework.
(b) Strengthening the capacity of decentralized authorities to plan, monitor and deliver
social services for children, with a special focus on the most disadvantaged groups.
(c) Coordinating implementation of different sectoral interventions in the same geographic
locations to enhance programmatic synergies for children and families at community level.
(d) Fostering innovative partnerships with civil society to provide customized behaviour
change and community outreach initiatives to improve child-friendly practices among diverse
communities.

Health
13. The Health Programme will contribute to the goals of the Health Sector Development
Plan 2015–2019 and Outcome 3 of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) 2015–2019: Populations in intervention areas, especially vulnerable groups,
access and use quality, sustainable basic social services. The programme will expand the use
of integrated health services for children under five years old. An emphasis will be placed on
newborns, increasing coverage in focus regions by taking to scale key life-saving
interventions through proven strategies such as Mother and Child Health Weeks and
community-based service delivery. Programme components include:
(a) Advocacy for increased health sector financing and support for development and
implementation of the health sector plan to increase the number of functional facilities and
trained medical staff, including community health workers.

4/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

(b) Improving coordination and linkages between public and community health systems to
increase access to and demand for basic health services among hard-to-reach populations.
(c) Strengthening routine immunization systems with a specific focus on microplanning,
cold chain and vaccine management, social mobilization, outreach and biannual national
vaccination campaigns, and monitoring for corrective action to address bottlenecks and
reduce geographical equity gaps.
(d) Scaling up facility-based essential neonatal care interventions as well as communitybased care for pregnant women and newborns.
(e) System-strengthening support to the national medical supply chain to improve
availability and affordability of essential medicines for vulnerable populations.
(f) Management and technical capacity development of subnational health structures to
plan and implement programmes to prevent, diagnose and treat the illnesses responsible for
the majority of deaths in children under five (pneumonia, diarrhoea and malaria), as well as
immunization, neonatal care and prevention of new HIV infections in children through
enhanced delivery of services.
14. The Health Financial and Technical Partners meeting, which brings together the
Ministry of Health, United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), World Health Organization
(WHO), UNAIDS and UNICEF, the World Bank, donors and non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners, will be the main partnership forum. UNICEF will continue to
work closely on country-level implementation with counterparts in the H4+ partnership as
well as Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.

Nutrition
15. The Nutrition Programme will contribute to the 2012–2015 National Nutrition Plan,
the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) objectives and Outcome 3 of the UNDAF 2015–2019. The
goal of the programme is to support national and subnational authorities to improve nutrition
and reduce rates of stunting through improved and equitable nutrition services and care
practices. The specific priorities include:
(a) Strengthening the capacity of the National Nutrition Office and subnational authorities
to effectively coordinate, monitor and evaluate the National Nutrition Plan and SUN Road
Map.
(b) Advocacy for enhanced coordination between health and nutrition community workers,
including full integration of the treatment of severe acute malnutrition (SAM) into the health
system.
(c) Scaling up community nutrition interventions with a focus on pregnant women and
children in the 1,000-day period before a child’s second birthday. Priority interventions
include nutrition counselling in the community, promotion of appropriate infant and young
child feeding practices (including breastfeeding and complementary feeding), and treatment
of SAM.
(d) Advocacy for increased attention to behaviour change communication in Government
programmes to shift attitudes, practices and social norms influencing nutritional decisions.

5/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

16. In line with the Government’s recognition of social protection as a priority area,
UNICEF is partnering with the World Bank on pilot interventions that link cash transfers to
nutrition, education and essential family practices, with the aim of enabling the poorest
families to access basic social services and improve child feeding practices.
17. The main partnership forum will be the SUN platform, which brings together the
Ministry of Health, Office of National Nutrition, United Nations agencies, including UNFPA,
UNICEF, WHO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and
the World Food Programme (WFP), and the World Bank, donors and NGO partners.

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
18. The Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Programme will contribute to the
National WASH strategy (and the WASH planning document) and Outcome 3 of the UNDAF
2015–2019. The programme will work at national and subnational levels to improve
households’ equitable access to safe drinking water, sanitation, healthy environments and to
promote safe hygiene practices. The specific programme priorities include:
(a)

Advocacy for increased political commitment and investments in the WASH sector.

(b) Supporting the Government to be an effective convener on sanitation issues and to
improve sector coordination, information-sharing and efficiency.
(c) Strengthening the capacity of regional water directorates in planning, budgeting, service
implementation, monitoring and coordination of the delivery of sustainable services to
underserved rural and isolated areas.
(d) Mobilizing communities to scale up Community-Led Total Sanitation and
implementing behaviour change communication programmes to address local cultural
barriers to improved sanitation and hygiene practices.
(e) Promoting the development of sustainable models such as the integration of WASH,
health and nutrition programmes through provision and use of WASH packages in schools
and health and nutrition centres.
19. The main partners of the WASH programme include the Ministry of Water, UNDP,
NGOs and civil society, users’ associations, traditional leaders and local authorities.

Education
20. The Education Programme will contribute to the broader Education for All goals in
the Interim Education Sector Plan 2013–2015 and Outcome 3 of the UNDAF 2015–2019.
The programme will focus on increasing school enrolment of the most vulnerable children,
and improving learning outcomes and survival rates at the primary level. There will be a
renewed emphasis on the quality of education and strengthening the capacity of the public
primary education system in focus regions to better plan and manage resources as well as
enrol and retain vulnerable children in school. The programme priorities include:
(a) Strengthening participatory planning and development of school-based action plans,
improving data-collection systems, and reinforcing resource management and accountability
mechanisms in schools.

6/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

(b) Supporting the development and implementation of a national teacher development
strategy and revision of the curriculum so that it is more closely aligned with the economic,
cultural and language context of local communities.
(c) Scaling up initiatives to enrol or re-enrol out-of-school children, with a focus on
children with disabilities.
(d) Supporting the development and implementation of an early childhood development
policy and early learning programme.
(e) Strengthening the capacity of subnational education authorities to better monitor system
performance and improve financial management systems.
21. The education technical and financial partners and the local education group will be the
main partnership forums, bringing together the Ministry of Education, United Nations
agencies (the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNESCO, UNICEF and WFP), the
World Bank, donors and NGO partners. UNICEF will continue to support sector coordination
and the education sector planning process, and to emphasize cooperation with civil society,
especially regarding the early childhood development policy and work on combating
violence in schools.

Child protection
22. The Child Protection Programme contributes to the UNDAF 2015–2019 Outcome 2:
Public institutions, civil society and the media, at the central and decentralized levels,
effectively fulfil their roles and are accountable for more peaceful governance that protects
human rights. The programme will focus on improving prevention and response to violence
and exploitation of children, including sexual exploitation, especially in the context of the
tourism and extractive industries, and on child marriage. Key programme priorities include:
(a) Development and implementation of a national child protection framework and an
advocacy strategy to increase resources for programmes against violence and exploitation of
children.
(b) Strengthening capacities of subnational child protection authorities to improve
coordination, planning, service delivery and monitoring of programmes and community
networks to provide child protection services.
(c) Scaling up implementation of behaviour change communication programmes to raise
awareness of all forms of violence against and exploitation of children; strengthening systems
to improve data collection, support for victims, reporting of violence and enforcement of
applicable laws.
23. The main partners for the UNICEF child protection programme include the Ministries
of Social Protection, Justice, Internal Affairs, Tourism, Internal Security and Youth, the
judiciary, United Nations agencies, development partners, the private sector and civil society
organizations (CSOs), coordinated through the National Child Protection Working Group,
the National Legal Reform Working Group, Protection Cluster, and the Working Group on
Gender and Human Rights.

Cross-cutting strategies
24. In addition, the country programme will implement the following cross-cutting
strategies:

7/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

(a) Behaviour change and community outreach interventions will be integrated into all
programme areas to increase the demand for basic social services. The priority is to build the
capacity of the Government to develop and implement evidence-based and customized
communication for development (C4D) strategies, and to engage with and build the capacity
of social networks such as traditional and faith-based networks, community agents, youth
networks and the mass media to influence behaviours.
(b) An approach to converge sectoral interventions in communities experiencing multiple
deprivations with the aim to strengthen cross-sectoral synergies will be piloted in 4 of the
country’s 22 regions, i.e. two of the most deprived regions in the south, and two regions prone
to cyclones and floods: one on the west coast and one in the northeast. The capacity of
regional authorities will be strengthened to coordinate the convergence of sectoral
programme interventions.
(c) Resilience-building, disaster risk reduction (DRR) and emergency preparedness and
response interventions will be integrated across all programme components with the aim of
strengthening the resilience of families and communities to cope with shocks, and supporting
the development of quality, inclusive regional DRR and emergency contingency plans and
humanitarian response capacity, in contribution to UNDAF 2015–2019 Outcome 1:
Vulnerable populations in intervention areas access income and employment opportunities,
improve their resiliency capacity, and contribute to an inclusive and equitable growth for
sustainable development.
(d) Engagement with the private sector to advocate for ethical business practices and
behaviours in relation to children as well as to leverage private sector resources (especially
those of the oil and extractive industries and the tourism sector) to steer investments in the
social sector.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Other
resources

Total

11 250

40 000

51 250

Water, sanitation and hygiene

6 250

17 000

23 250

Nutrition

6 250

12 000

18 250

Education

6 250

50 000

56 250

Child protection

5 000

8 000

13 000

Social policy and social protection

4 900

1 900

6 800

Intersectoral

9 415

5 100

14 515

Cross-sectoral (Operations)

7 500

7 000

14 500

56 815

141 000

197 815

Health

Total

8/19

Regular
resources

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Programme and risk management
25. This country programme document outlines UNICEF contributions to national results
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for alignment between
results and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes
are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures.
26. Within the framework of UNDAF 2015–2019, UNICEF will continue to lead
coordination in the education, nutrition and WASH sectors and will contribute to health and
protection coordination mechanisms.
27. The country programme will implement a combination of programme strategies that
will allow UNICEF to adapt and rapidly and flexibly respond to changes, and to manage and
mitigate risks in the programme environment. This will include support to policy and
legislative framework and system development at the central level, increased emphasis on
decentralized capacity development, results monitoring and management at the regional level
and continued focus on community-based service delivery.
28. The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be strengthened to respond to
major risks in programme implementation, particularly those arising from weaknesses in
governance and government financial oversight. Specifically, a new HACT unit will be
established to identify risks within each partner organization, apply immediate mitigation
measures and build partner capacity to better manage risks.
29. The capacity of technical staff will also be strengthened to reinforce policy and system
priorities at the central level. Staff capacity will be maintained at regional level to facilitate
engagement with a range of government and non-governmental partners, ensure timely
information on risks and opportunities, and provide technical and management support to
government counterparts.
30. In the context of a gradual return to regular aid modalities, UNICEF will develop
advocacy, partnership and resource mobilization strategies to facilitate mobilization of
resources for the country programme and to leverage support for child rights programmes in
the country.
31. Mid-year and annual reviews with partners will focus on assessing programme quality,
efficiency and effectiveness, and validation of risks and related mitigation strategies.

Monitoring and evaluation
32. The UNDAF strategic results matrix and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan will
serve as the overall framework for monitoring UNDAF outcome results. Under the oversight
of the national M&E working group, UNICEF will collaborate with other United Nations
agencies to build the capacity of the National Institute of Statistics (INSTAT), sectoral M&E
departments and regional development directorates to collate, manage, disseminate and
analyse data disaggregated by gender, age, wealth and geography for monitoring progress
against the new National Development Plan results.
33. To improve the quality of data generated through routine national monitoring systems,
additional focus will be placed on innovative technologies that facilitate rapid information
collection, building on current initiatives such as the SMS-based system for monitoring
school enrolment. Technical support will be provided to subnational authorities for M&E

9/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

system strengthening and results monitoring through UNICEF staff based at the regional
level.
34. A results and resources framework and a five-year Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan will serve as the basis for strengthening ongoing situation analysis and
results monitoring. Major emphasis will be placed on monitoring the impact of UNICEFsupported programmes in improving quality and maintaining or expanding access to essential
social services, particularly for the most disadvantaged children.
35. Major evaluations to generate evidence and examine programme impact have been
planned. These include evaluations on: infant and young child nutrition and feeding practices;
integration of maternal and neonatal health services; an inclusive education programme for
out-of-school children; birth registration; violence prevention initiatives; and sociocultural
norms and practices.
36. To ensure that programme strategies remain relevant in an evolving context, mid-year
and annual reviews will focus on exploring new opportunities and identifying risks,
particularly in relation to natural disasters, governance challenges and other shocks that make
households more vulnerable. A continuous assessment of barriers and bottlenecks in fulfilling
programme objectives, especially in reaching the most disadvantaged girls and boys, will
further inform adjustments to programme strategies.

10/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Annex
Results and resources framework
Madagascar – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2015-2019
Convention on the Rights of the Child: Articles 1: Definition of the child, 2: Non-discrimination, 3: Best interests of the child, 6: Survival and
development, 7: Identity rights, 12: Right to express an opinion, 19: Protection from violence, 23: Children with disabilities, 24: Right to health, 28: Right to
education, 32: Child labour, 34: Sexual exploitation
National priorities: MDG 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger; MDG 2: Achieve universal primary education; MDG 3: Promote gender equality and
empower women; MDG 4: Reduce child mortality; MDG 5: Improve maternal health; MDG 6: Combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases.
UNDAF outcomes involving UNICEF:
Outcome 1: Vulnerable populations in intervention areas access income and employment opportunities, improve their resiliency capacity, and contribute to
an inclusive and equitable growth for sustainable development.
Outcome 2: Public institutions, civil society and the media, at the central and decentralized levels, effectively fulfil their roles and are accountable for more
peaceful governance that protects human rights.
Outcome 3: Populations in intervention areas, especially vulnerable groups, access and use quality, sustainable basic social services.
Outcome indicators measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution:












Extreme poverty rate (disaggregated by region, gender, urban/rural environment, wealth quintile, etc.)
Availability of updated census data
Percentage of accepted recommendations from the Universal Periodic Review that have been implemented
Percentage of public spending under the responsibility of devolved or decentralized territorial entities (disaggregated by Devolved Territorial Authorities
and Decentralized Technical Services)
Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births)
Net primary school enrolment rate
Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition among children under five
Percentage of the population using improved basic sanitation facilities
Percentage of the population using improved water facilities
HIV, tuberculosis and malaria incidence rates.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Related UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014–2017 outcomes: 1: Health; 3: WASH; 4: Nutrition; 5: Education; 6: Child protection; 7: Social inclusion
UNICEF
outcomes

Outcome 1.
Health
By the end of
2019, children
under 5 years of
age, especially
newborns, have
access to and use
integrated health
services with high
coverage in target
regions.

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme outputs

Percentage of surviving
infants in all districts
vaccinated against measles
Baseline: 63% (WHO/
UNICEF estimates 2013)
Target: 80%

Monthly report
Health
Management
Information
System (HMIS);
WHO/ UNICEF
records

Health policy and systems:
Government capacity to
develop and implement
health policies, strategies and
protocols, and to plan,
monitor, mobilize and
equitably allocate financial
and human resources is
improved.

Percentage of children aged
0–59 months with suspected
pneumonia receiving
antibiotics
Baseline: 32.7% (MDG
Monthly report
survey 2012–2013)
(HMIS)
Target: 60%
Percentage of children aged
0–59 months sleeping under
insecticide-treated mosquito
nets
Baseline: 88.5% (MDG
Malaria indicator
survey 2012–2013)
survey
Target by 2017: 90%
Percentage of children aged
0–59 months with diarrhoea
receiving oral rehydration
salts and zinc
Monthly report
(HMIS)

12/19

Major partners,
Indicative resources by
partnership frameworks country programme
outcome (in millions of
United States dollars)

Ministry of Health
Ministry of
Communication
WHO
UNFPA
European Union (EU)
United States Agency for
International
Development (USAID)
French Government
Gavi, the Vaccine
Maternal, newborn and
child health: Mothers and
Alliance
newborns in target regions
Global Fund to Fight
are reached with key
AIDS, Tuberculosis and
interventions during the
Malaria
hours and days of highest
Bill and Melinda Gates
risk. Girls and boys are
Foundation
reached at institutional and
Population Services
community level with
International (PSI)
prevention and treatment for World Bank
the three illnesses that cause African Development
the majority of deaths among Bank (ADB)
young children (pneumonia, Maternal and Child
diarrhoea and malaria).
Integrated Program
(MCHIP)
Vaccination: At least 80%
Japan International
of children in all districts in
Cooperation Agency
six focus regions are reached
(JICA)
with three doses of combined

RR

OR

Total

11.3

40

51.3

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Baseline: ORS: 14.6%;
Zinc: 3% (MDG survey
2012–2013)
Target: ORS: 50%; Zinc:
30%
Percentage of mothers and
newborns receiving
postnatal care within 2 days
of delivery
Baseline: 52.4% (MDG
survey 2012–2013)
Target: 70%
Outcome 2.
WASH
By the end of
2019, households
and communities
have access to
safe drinking
water, sanitation,
and healthy
environments and
good hygiene
practices are
equitably
improved in
target regions.

diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus
vaccine (DPT3). National
coverage of 90% with a
focus on the hardest-to-reach
and marginalized
communities.

Monthly report
(HMIS)

Percentage of population in
rural areas using an
improved source of
drinking water
Baseline: 35% (JMP 2014)
Target: 50%

Ministry of
Water, UNICEF
records

Percentage of population in
rural areas practising open
defecation
Baseline: 48% (JMP 2014)
Target: <1% (in 2018)

House Hold
Survey (HHS),
Census, JMP
report

Ministry of Water
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Education
(MoE)
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of
Decentralization
Ministry of
Communication
Regional Directorates
ADB
EU
WASH in health, nutrition JICA
USAID
and education centres:
Community-level institutions Civil society
have strengthened capacity
to promote the use of safe
water and latrines, and handwashing with soap by
children and families.
Policy and capacity
development: By the end of
2019, Government
demonstrates increased
political commitment and
capacity to legislate, plan,
budget, coordinate, deliver,
monitor and evaluate WASH
interventions at scale at
national and subnational
levels.

6.2

17

23.2

Sustainable access to safe
water: Community demand

13/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

for sustainable safe drinking
water sources is increased
and met.
Sanitation and hygiene: All
communities eradicate open
defecation and use improved
sanitation facilities in
combination with
appropriate hygiene
practices.

Outcome 3.
Nutrition
By the end of
2019, child
nutrition
interventions
result in better
nutrition
outcomes in
target regions.

14/19

Percentage of children who Nationwide
are exclusively breastfed for surveys (DHS,
the first six months
MICS)
Baseline: 43% (MDG
Survey 2012–2013)
Target: 60%
Percentage of children who
are stunted
Baseline: female: 44.5%;
male: 50.2% (MDG Survey
2012–2013)
Target: female: 34%; male:
40%

Nationwide
surveys (DHS,
MICS)

Percentage of children aged
6–23 months receiving the
minimum acceptable diet
Baseline: 13%
(Comprehensive Food
Security and Vulnerability
Analysis2010)
Target: 30%

Nationwide
surveys (DHS,
MICS)

Ministry of Health
Ministry of
Communication
SALAMA (national
central drugs and medical
supply store) Office of
National
Nutrition
PSI
Improved nutrition and
care practices: Knowledge
Regional Nutrition
and adoption of nutrition and Offices
care practices among
Nutrition cluster
caregivers and communities members
is improved.
Policy, coordination and
financing: The capacity of
national and regional
authorities to advocate, plan,
budget for and coordinate
SUN interventions is
improved.

Capacity for nutrition
interventions: Increased
national and regional
capacity to provide access to
nutrition interventions.

6.3

12

18.3

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Outcome 4.
Education
By the end of
2019, more girls
and boys are
enrolled, retained
and learning in
pre-primary and
primary schools,
and there are
fewer children
out of school.

Primary school net
enrolment rate
Baseline: 69.4% national
(female: 70.1%; male:
68.1%) (MDG Survey
2012–2013)
Target: 90% overall and for
each gender
Drop-out rate between
grade 1 and grade 2 at the
national level and in the
target regions
Baseline: 21.7% (MoE
2012–2013)
Target: 12.8%
Survival rate at primary
level
Baseline: 35.3% (female:
36.6%; male: 34.1%) (MoE
2009/2010 to 2013/2014)
Target: 50% (female: 50%;
male: 50%)
Mean score of 5th grade
pupils at the Programme for
the Analysis of Education
Systems (PASEC) test in
Malagasy/Mathematics/
French
Baseline: Malagasy:
43.5/100; Mathematics:
40/100; French: 26.8/100
(PASEC 2012)

Ministry of
Education
Administrative
data

Ministry of
Education
Administrative
data

Ministry of
Education
Administrative
data

Ministry of
Education
Administrative
data

Education policy and
strategy: MoE capacity to
plan, manage, communicate
and govern at the central and
decentralized level is
strengthened.

MoE
Ministry of
Communication
Handicap International

6.2

50

56.2

Access to primary
education: More children
access the primary education
system thanks to an increase
in the number of classrooms,
and implementation of
initiatives to promote
enrolment and re-enrolment
of children in schools and
learning programmes,
including children with
disabilities.
Quality of education: MoE
improves the quality of
teaching in primary schools
by improving employment
conditions for teachers,
increasing in-service training
and providing appropriate
teaching and learning
materials.

15/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Target: Malagasy: 60/100;
Mathematics: 60/100;
French: 50/100
Outcome 5.
Child protection
Improved and
equitable
prevention of and
response to
exploitation of
and violence
against children
in target regions

Outcome 6.
Social policy and
social protection
Greater national
commitment,

16/19

Percentage of girls aged
15–19 who have been
victims of sexual violence
Baseline: 14.1% (MDG
Survey 2012–2013)
Target: 10%

Household
surveys (DHS,
MICS)

Percentage of women aged
20–24 who were married or
in union before they were
18 years old
Baseline: 41.2% (MDG
Survey 2012–2013)
Target: 38%

Household
surveys (DHS,
MICS)

Percentage of children
under 5 years of age who
have had their births
registered
Baseline: 83% (MDG
Survey 2012–2013)
Target: 90%

Household
surveys (DHS,
MICS)

Ministry of Social
Protection
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Interior
Ministry of Security
Ministry of Education
Ministry of
Communication
Police, gendarmerie
Courts/tribunals
University Hospital
Regional and district
Child protection services:
Key child protection service
authorities
providers (medical, legal,
Traditional leaders
psychological and social) are Youth associations
able to provide coordinated
Women’s associations
and quality services to child NGOs, community-based
victims of violence in
organizations, faithtargeted areas.
based organizations
Child protection policy
framework: A national child
protection policy with an
adequate budget and
effective M&E framework is
in place and implemented. A
legal framework to address
violence against children in
line with international
standards is in force.

5

8

13

4.9

1.9

6.8

Child protection
awareness: Families and
communities are aware of
child protection laws,
services and what constitutes
harmful practices against
children.
Evidence generation: The
socio-economic situation and
its impact on the situation of
mothers and children, as well

National and
decentralized
Government ministries
including, among others:

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

accountability
and capacity to
legislate, plan and
budget for
inclusive social
policies, and
progressively
integrate social
protection
measures into
relevant
programme areas.

as the recommendations
from programme evaluation,
are analysed to better
influence social policies and
budgeting, and strengthen
evidence-based
programming.
Policy support: Policy
dialogue and partnerships
with national partners
(Government and civil
society) are established to
contribute to greater national
commitment, accountability
and capacity to legislate,
plan and budget for inclusive
social policies and social
protection measures.

Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Economy and
Planning
Ministry of
Decentralization
INSTAT
World Bank
Civil society
Private sector

Social protection: Dialogue
and partnerships with the
Government and donors are
established to develop a
national social protection
framework and to
progressively integrate social
protection measures into
relevant programme areas.
Public-private sector
partnership: Public and
private sector partnerships
are established and
maintained to influence
business behaviour to
promote respect for and
support of child rights and

17/19

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

business principles, and to
leverage support for
programmes.
Outcome 7.
Intersectoral
The rights of
children and
women are fully
integrated into
and prioritized in
sector
programming,
emergency
response and
communication.

There are no outcome
indicators for the
intersectoral outcome
(indicators will be outputlevel)

Media and external
relations: Communication
and media activities
effectively promote child
rights.
C4D: National partners have
the capacity to effectively
plan, coordinate, implement
and monitor C4D strategies
that promote priority family
practices to realize child
rights.
Planning: The quality,
coherence and coordination
of programme planning are
strengthened at national,
subnational and country
office levels, in line with
UNICEF corporate priorities
and guidelines.
Monitoring: The quality,
coherence and coordination
of monitoring systems are
strengthened at national,
subnational and country
office levels to facilitate a
results-based management
approach.

18/19

9.4

University of
Antananarivo

National and
decentralized
Government Ministries
including, among others:
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Economy
and Planning
Ministry of
Decentralization

INSTAT

5.1

14.5

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.1

Emergency and DRR: The
DRR intervention is
strengthened and reflected in
all programmes,
decentralized contingency
planning is improved, and
emergency responses are
implemented in accordance
with UNICEF’s Core
Commitments for Children
in Humanitarian Action.
Cross-sectoral
(Operations)

There are no outcome
indicators for the crosssectoral outcome (indicators
will be output-level)

Total resources

National Office of Risk
and Disaster Management
(BNGRC)
Ministry of the Interior
Catholic Relief Services
CARE International
WFP
OCHA

7.5

7

14.5

56.8

141

197.8

_______

19/19

