E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Malaysia
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Malaysia is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $4,270,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $34,750,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

1/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

Programme rationale
1. The Government of Malaysia is committed to leading the process of transforming the
country into high-income status by 2020 through rapid socio-economic development and
growth. Vision 2020 envisages Malaysia as a nation developed not only economically, but
also in terms of social justice, political stability, system of government, quality of life, social
and spiritual values, national pride and confidence.
2. An upper-middle-income country with significant cultural diversity, Malaysia is home
to around 30 million people, of whom nearly 10 million are under the age of 18. More than
half of children are Malay, 17.5 per cent are Chinese, 14.1 per cent belong to other
Bumiputera1, 5.9 per cent are Indian, 3.6 per cent are non-Malaysian citizens and 1.3 per cent
are classified as others. More than 70 per cent of the population lives in urban areas.2
3. The country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals at
aggregate level, especially those related directly to children. While poverty has been virtually
eliminated over the past 20 years, from 12.4 per cent in 1992 to 1.7 per cent in 2012 3, regional
and ethnic disparities remain. The state of Sabah has a poverty rate of 8.1 per cent, followed
by Kelantan (2.7 per cent), Sarawak (2.4 per cent), Perlis (1.9 per cent), Kedah and
Terengganu (both at 1.7 per cent) 4. The poverty rate among Malays and other Bumiputeras,
the most populous ethnic group, is higher at 2.2 per cent as compared to the Indian population
(1.85 per cent) or Chinese populations (0.3 per cent5).
4. The Eleventh Malaysia Plan, 2016-20206 recognizes that if Malaysia is to compete
globally and become a high-income nation, beyond achieving sustained economic growth it
must also focus on harnessing talent, improving well-being and enhancing inclusion.
Malaysia will also need to continue to prioritize social cohesion and ensure family and
community resilience against economic shocks and natural disasters. 7 Having improved the
lives of many, dedicated efforts are required to reach all children, including those living in
poverty, with disabilities, undocumented and stateless.
5. Malaysia ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1995 with 12
reservations, of which five remain: article 2 on non-discrimination; article 7 on birth
registration; article 14 on freedom of expression; article 28 (1a) on making primary education
compulsory and free to all; and article 37 on non-subjecting to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. To ensure that all children develop to their full
potential, these reservations need to be reviewed with Vision 2020 in mind. Malaysia ratified
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in 1995
with a number of reservations, all of which have subsequently been withdrawn.
6. Malaysia ratified the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and on the involvement of
children in armed conflict in 2012. The accession to the Protocols signal the country’s
determination to strengthen systems and enforce existing legislation, and to step up measures

‘Bumiputera’ refers to the Malays and indigenous peoples, including the natives of Sabah and Sarawak.
2 Department of Statistics, Malaysia 2014.
3
Economic Planning Unit, Prime Minister’s Department, <www.epu.gov.my/household-income-poverty>
4
Ibid.
5
Department of Statistics, Malaysia: Household income and basic amenities survey report 2012, 2013
6
Economic Planning Unit, Prime Minister’s Department, <http://hq.lpkp.gov.my/index.php/en/15-trivia/55rancangan-malaysia-ke-11-merupakan-rancangan-pembangunan-lima-tahun-negara-yang-ke-13>
7
United Nations Development Programme, Malaysia Human Development Report 2013.
1

2/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

at international and regional level to combat child prostitution, child pornography and sexual
exploitation of children.
7. In 2010, Malaysia ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
with reservations on article 15 on freedom from torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment8, and article 18 on the right to liberty of movement and nationality.
Malaysia is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
1967 Protocol. However, the Government provides assistance and protection on
humanitarian grounds to refugees and asylum seekers on a case-by-case basis.
8. An estimated 2.6 million non-Malaysians live in the country, 451,900 of whom are
children and young people aged 0-19 years. The total includes refugees, undocumented,
stateless and migrant workers.9 Fifty-four per cent of non-Malaysians live in Sabah State.
There are no specific Malaysian Government social service budget allocations for these
children and their families. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the private sector and
others are the only sources of education services for these children and access to government
health services is on a cost-basis, which is often a major barrier.
9. Birth certificates are essential to access health services and to enrol in public schools.
In 2014, the Government announced that all births must be registered and has taken steps to
improve the system. However, access barriers remain for those living in more remote areas,
and there are financial challenges for some families that did not register their children and
consequently have to pay a fine. There is limited publicly available data on birth registration.
10. Malaysia compares with high-income countries with regard to child mortality, with an
infant mortality rate of 6.3/1,000 live births and an under-five mortality rate (U5MR) of 7.7/
1,000 live births in 201110; with mortality among boys slightly higher than for girls.
Disparities among states have narrowed but persist: with U5MR ranging from 9.9/1,000 in
Kelantan State to 5.8/1,000 in Kuala Lumpur.11 Ministry of Health (MOH) surveys from 1993
to 2003 indicate that deaths may be underreported in Sabah State, but they do not provide an
estimate of under-registration. There are differences in mortality rates between ethnic groups,
with the risk of Malay newborns dying before reaching the age of one, twice as high as that
of Chinese newborns.12 Major bottlenecks to quality health for all relate primarily to the
inability to use services due to the lack of proper documents and distance to facilities,
particularly in the more remote areas of Sarawak.
11. More under-five children are underweight, with the percentage increasing from 16.7
per cent in 2006 to 19.6 per cent in 2011 (National Health and Morbidity Survey). There are
also significant geographic differences, ranging from less than 1 per cent in Johor to 10.1 per
cent in Sarawak.13 At the same time, Malaysia is also facing the challenge of overnutrition,
with 22.5 per cent of men aged under 20 overweight (with 8.8 per cent obese), and 19.1 per
cent of women under 20, being overweight (with 7.2 per cent obese).14

8

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Department of Statistics, Malaysia, 2014 estimates; <http://pqi.stats.gov.my/searchBI.php>.
10
Ministry of Health,
<http://www.moh.gov.my/images/gallery/publications/HEALTH%20FACTS%202014.pdf>.
11
Malaysia Ministry of Health – Vital Statistics 2014.
12
Economic Planning Unit, Prime Minister’s Department, Malaysia/UNICEF, Profile of children in
Malaysia, 2013.
13
Ibid.
14
Lancet, vol. 384, no. 9945, pp. 766–781.
9

3/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

12. Malaysia is close to achieving universal primary education by 2015, with a primary
enrolment rate of 94.4 per cent in 2013. Primary school completion is 96 per cent, but
disparities exist among indigenous communities and at subnational level, with a 30 per cent
dropout rate of Orang Asli (indigenous) children in transition to secondary education in 2012
compared with the national average of 4 per cent.15 The difference between states with the
highest enrolment rates (Penang, Perak and Selangor) and Sabah and Sarawak is between 6
to 10 percentage points.16 Enrolment rates at lower- and upper-secondary levels have
generally remained static in recent years, at 85.4 per cent and 77.9 per cent, respectively in
2013.17 Gender parity in primary education has been reached, and girls are now performing
better than boys on test scores and on transition to secondary, post-secondary and tertiary
education. In addition, the tendency for boys to drop out is higher than for girls.18
13. The Malaysia Education Blueprint 2013–2025 focuses on improving access to
education, raising standards with more emphasis on ‘higher order thinking skills’, bridging
achievement gaps, promoting unity among students and maximizing system efficiency.
Increased importance has been given to investments in preschool, bilingual education and
English literacy, along with efforts to make teaching a career of choice. The Government has
set the goal of being in the top third of countries participating in the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) by 2025.
14. School access for the most marginalized children remains a challenge. Alternative
education is provided by NGOs and other development partners, especially for; children of
IMM13 cardholders (citizens of the Philippines who sought political refuge in Malaysia
during the Moro rebellion in the 1970s), children living on plantations, and refugees
recognized by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The
Education Act 1996 and Education Blueprint 2013–2025 guarantee the right of all children
to education, however, for non-Malaysians access to the public school system is on a costbasis. The Ministry of Education (MOE) is preparing guidelines that could lead to an
alternative learning policy. However, in the absence of a national policy, many alternative
learning centres are providing fragmented, low quality, education.
15. Quality preschool early learning is constrained by the fact that more than 90 per cent of
teachers at private pre-schools lack formal early childhood care and education
qualifications.19 The Government has embarked on a project to raise the standard of preschool
teachers through certification and training. Very few preschools or early childhood care
centres offer inclusive education for children with special needs; and children are often not
admitted due to challenges in physical accessibility as well as the lack of skilled teachers.
16. Children in need of special care and children with disabilities are often placed in
government or NGO-run homes, or in community-based settings. NGOs are required to
register and are regulated under the Care Centres Act 1993 (Amendment 2007). In 2013,
there were 90 residential care NGOs and two daily care centres registered, with a population
of 5,186 children.

15

Malaysia Ministry of Education 2013 Annual Report.
World Bank: Malaysia Economic Monitor, ‘High performing education’, 2013.
17
Malaysia Education Blueprint 2013–2025.
18
Ibid.
19
‘Its good to start them early’, press release, 11 November 2012:
<www.pemandu.gov.my/gtp/Media_Coverage-@-It%E2%80%99s_good_to_start_them_early.aspx>.
16

4/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

17. Available and reliable child protection data is limited, with no population-based survey
data on the prevalence of violence against children. Department of Social Welfare data (2013)
indicate 4,119 reported cases of suspected child abuse, neglect and abandonment. Around 10
per cent of these children have been placed in institutions.
18. The minimum age of criminal responsibility of children is 10 years for both males and
females: below the minimum age (12 years) recommended by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child. While children older than 12 are treated under the same criminal justice system,
the treatment of child offenders, from arrest to detention, until a trial process commences and
is completed, is distinct and separate from that of adult offenders.
19. A 2013 study of mechanisms for handling children in conflict with the law, conducted
by the Ministry of Women, Family and Community Development (MWFCD), highlighted
the need for a coherent and integrated approach to justice for children. It recommended the
development of an integrated national Juvenile Justice Reform Strategy and Plan of Action
that incorporates prevention and early intervention, drawing on international standards and
global best practices in the administration of juvenile justice.
20. There is a severe shortage of trained and experienced social workers who can provide
professional, quality services for children and families. A 2013 report on the child protection
system in Malaysia recommended professionalization of social work as a prerequisite for
development of a progressive child welfare sector, and efforts have commenced to enact a
Social Workers Bill to help to address this significant barrier to a more effective child
protection system.
21. It is estimated that there are 800 to 1,000 child marriages each year involving children
younger than 16 years.20 It is a challenge to obtain official figures due to the multiple marriage
systems in existence – civil, customary and Sharia.
22. In many communities, traditional attitudes remain about the role of children and
adolescents in society, limiting their ability to realize their rights to express their views and
to participate as equals in communities, schools and families.
23. In 2012, the Digital Malaysia initiative was introduced to transform the nation into a
digital economy by 2020 and to encourage citizens to become producers, not just consumers,
of technology. Nearly 70 per cent of households have Internet access; and more than half of
Internet users are below age 30.21 While these investments are bringing new opportunities
and resources into the lives of young Malaysians, digital risks have also emerged.
24. The flooding in peninsular Malaysia in December 2014 clearly indicated that the
country is at risk from natural hazards and climate change. Despite a policy of mainstreaming
climate-resilient development into national sectoral plans, this has not been fully
implemented. More comprehensive guidelines and resources are required in order to move
towards a disaster risk management approach.
25. A key lesson learned from the 2011–2015 country programme is the importance of
moving beyond access to alternative education to ensuring access and quality. Studies of the
Alternative Learning Centres being provided by NGOs and other organizations for
undocumented, stateless and refugee children concluded that the educational outcomes were
very limited. This was due to the absence of quality standards, limited capacity of teachers

Endut, N. et al, ‘The assessment of the incidences of child marriages in Malaysia and a preliminary study
of their causes and consequences’, 2012.
21
Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, Pocket Book of Statistics, Q3 2014.
20

5/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

and the absence of school certification. This evidence informed UNICEF advocacy with the
Government towards developing an Alternative Learning Policy, and for a priority in the
2016–2020 country programme of ensuring the improvement of teaching standards and
formalization of learning centres.

Programme priorities and partnerships
26. The 2016–2020 country programme of cooperation will support Malaysia to achieve
the development goals being defined in the Eleventh Malaysia Plan towards the achievement
of Vision 2020. It aims to assist the fulfilment of the rights of children in Malaysia, and ensure
children are able to maximize their potential to contribute to the nation’s development. The
programme is aligned with the draft United Nations Strategic Partnership Framework
(UNSPF), and will support the mainstreaming of the Sustainable Development Goals into
national policies and programmes.
27. The programme was developed with consideration of Malaysia becoming a highincome country in the next decade and the specific roles that UNICEF can play in such a
context. Towards this end, a core set of strategic approaches will intersect the country
programme to provide the space and flexibility for a shift towards a transformed mode of
engagement.
(a) Evidence-generation and advocacy – promoting the generation of evidence-based
data and information to identify disparities and allow for equity-focused and risk-informed
programming, focusing on areas with data limitations such as birth registration, child
protection and the situation of undocumented children;
(b) Institutional capacity building – of Government and key civil society organizations
(CSOs), particularly related to the child protection system and child rights monitoring and
risk analysis, for NGOs or CSOs to provide quality education for excluded children, for the
private sector to undertake ethical and efficient corporate social responsibility (CSR)
initiatives, and for universities or other institutions to develop and manage research-based
social and behavioural change strategies;
(c) Partnerships enhancement – with the private sector, faith-based organizations,
professional associations and research/policy institutes to support policy formulation,
modelling in public finance, scale up of social welfare service provision and implementation
of the Children’s Rights and Business Principles, and resource mobilization for investment
in children in Malaysia and internationally;, and
(d) Facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation – including promoting the
sharing of evidence-based good practices from Malaysia across the region and to other uppermiddle-income countries, and ensuring a stronger focus on children in the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme.
28. Through the United Nations gender theme group, UNICEF will support the
Government to pursue gender equality and mainstreaming within social and economic
development programmes as a key strategy for reaching Vision 2020. This will include
support for gender-sensitivity during programme conceptualization, in formative research
and analyses, and support for strengthening the capacity for gender-disaggregated data
collection and analysis. A focus on results for adolescents (aged 10 to 18) will cut across
programmes, providing support for policies and age- and gender- appropriate interventions.
UNICEF will also harness the potential of innovation and technology to support the

6/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

meaningful engagement and participation of adolescents in decision-making and their own
development.
29. While the programme will operate nationwide, particularly through support for
evidence generation, policy and strategy formulation and operationalization, a specific focus
will be on the eastern states that have the highest disparities.
30. The country programme will be operationalized through three multisectoral
components; each of which contributes to the seven UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014-2017
outcomes.
Enhanced child and adolescent well-being
31. UNICEF will support actions towards strengthening national policies, institutional
capacities and the delivery of quality social services that enhance child and adolescent wellbeing and enable them to survive, thrive and develop to their full potential, unexpected shocks
and stresses notwithstanding.
32. UNICEF will provide technical assistance to support the strengthening of Government
capacity to collect and analyse education data, and develop strategic plans to improve
educational outcomes for children and achieve the goal of ensuring that by 2025 Malaysia is
in the top third of countries participating in PISA and TIMSS.
33. UNICEF will advocate for, and build capacity of Government and civil society partners
to promote the expanded provision of age-appropriate, quality early learning opportunities
for children with disabilities, including long-term research-centred modelling of options and
benefits of early childhood education. Building on the experiences from the UNICEFsupported programme of NGO provision of basic education to refugee children in Sabah, a
major focus will be assisting the Government, NGOs and the private sector to make basic
education more accessible for refugee, stateless and undocumented children, including those
living on palm oil plantations. Technical assistance for development of curricula and
strategies to improve the quality of teachers in community schools, along with experiencesharing in alternative and mother-tongue language education from other countries, will be
provided.
34. Technical assistance will be provided to support the acceleration of Malaysian
Government efforts to provide safe access to a high quality, comprehensive and wellcoordinated child protection system with a focus on prevention of and response to violence
against children, including during emergencies. UNICEF will continue to promote
professionalization of social workers through capacity development to strengthen case
management and appropriate family support interventions. Building on the recommendations
from a 2013 study of mechanisms for handling children in conflict with the law in Malaysia,
conducted by the MWFCD, UNICEF will continue to advocate for, and subsequently provide
high quality technical assistance for the development of an integrated national Juvenile
Justice Reform Strategy and Plan of Action that incorporates prevention and early
intervention measures.
35. To overcome data limitations and inadequate monitoring systems, UNICEF will
support evidence-generation and the introduction of a digitalized management information
system for child protection case management and programme decision-making. UNICEF will
continue to promote the professionalization of social workers, focusing on their capacity for
early identification of at-risk children and families and for case management to ensure timely,
appropriate family support interventions. UNICEF will support research on the knowledge,

7/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

attitudes and practices of families, caregivers and communities in relation to violence, abuse
and neglect, stigma and discrimination and the development of culturally-appropriate social
and behavioural change strategies to address the findings.
36. UNICEF will advocate for policies and an enabling environment that encourages and
promotes birth registration for all children in Malaysia, irrespective of legal status and
residence. UNICEF will support access to best practices in the use of technology in birth
registration and provide technical assistance for mapping of unregistered children.
Additionally, UNICEF will assist Malaysia to achieve its national birth registration targets
by 2024, as agreed in the Regional Action Framework on Civil Registration and Vital
Statistics (CRVS) endorsed by the Government during a Ministerial Conference on CRVS in
November 2014.
37. To support the Government to address the increasing double burden of malnutrition
among young children, UNICEF will provide high quality technical expertise and facilitate
knowledge sharing, focusing on the first 1,000 days before a child turns 2, including the
mother’s pregnancy, and including maternal nutrition and infant and young child feeding
practices, in line with the National Nutrition Policy. UNICEF will advocate for improved
implementation of the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and
enhanced nutrition-friendly legislation, standards and policies.
38. Towards reversing the increasing levels of obesity and associated non-communicable
diseases, UNICEF will support the generation of evidence to focus greater attention on
improving nutritional and dietary practices, and the development of communication
strategies to promote healthy eating. A specific emphasis will be on improving the nutritional
value of food available at schools, including the development of policies and guidelines for
healthy foods and drinks supplied in school canteens, and strengthening partnerships with the
private sector on food-labelling standards.
39. During the first half of the country programme, UNICEF will collaborate with other
United Nations agencies and partners to support studies and research on adolescents in
Malaysia, including generating real-time data and other innovative methods to engage
adolescents and inform future programming.
Social inclusion and disparity reduction
40. UNICEF will support efforts to strengthen the commitment to an environment for
promoting child-centred social inclusion, disparity reduction and resilience.
41. Through sharing of experience from other upper-middle as well as high-income
countries, UNICEF will continue to promote enhancement of the Government’s integrated
social protection systems, including child-sensitive cash and social transfer programmes.
UNICEF will link vulnerable children, including those with disabilities, to key basic services
including health, education, social welfare and early childhood development, building
resilience against unexpected shocks, including food, fuel and financial crises and natural
disasters.
42. UNICEF will promote strengthening the child focus of budgeting and public financial
management, aiming to ensure adequate resource allocations to social protection, risk
reduction and child-centred development, particularly for the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable children. Specific assistance will be provided to increase the capacity of
Government and academic institutions to develop and monitor social investment in children,
and to produce and analyse reliable and disaggregated statistics on children and women,

8/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

including the use of multidimensional child poverty methodologies. UNICEF will partner
with the Public Expenditure Management Network Asia-Pacific to share good practices on
public finance management and social budgeting for children and young people and to build
the capacity of government agencies and other stakeholders in Malaysia.
43. Multi-stakeholder partnerships will be strengthened with universities, research
institutions, the private sector and youth organizations to conduct studies and research on the
mental and physical health of children and adolescents and promote collaboration and
partnerships across the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to enhance their well-being.
44. In response to the increasing regularity and severity of natural disasters such as flooding
and their impact on children, UNICEF will advocate for child-centred disaster risk reduction
to be mainstreamed across national and subnational development plans and, under the
UNSPF, jointly support capacity strengthening efforts by the United Nations system at
federal and state levels.
Enhanced engagement and partnerships for child rights
45. UNICEF will strengthen collaboration and will seek to enhance capacities, partnerships
and engagement with CSOs for child rights advocacy, engagement and monitoring, and for
mobilization of national resources for all children in Malaysia consistent with the country’s
growing international development agenda.
46. UNICEF will reach out to opinion leaders, religious and community leaders, CSOs,
children and adolescents and the media to further promote a child-centred approach to
sustainable development as an essential precondition for the achievement of Vision 2020.
Partnerships with traditional and social media will be expanded to enhance ethical,
responsible and responsive reporting and commentary on children’s development, challenges
and opportunities. Specific collaborations will be accelerated to promote national dialogue
on child-friendly social norms and for community-level monitoring of child rights.
47. Using digital and traditional media, UNICEF will seek to inspire individuals and
communities to act in the best interests of children. In the spirit of South-South cooperation,
UNICEF will facilitate experience-sharing between other countries on how to best prepare
young Malaysians for a technologically-driven society, and support initiatives to create safer
digital and technology usage for children and adolescents.
48. The potential of Malaysian universities and other institutions to become regional
centres of excellence for social and behavioural research and strategy development, for
example in the area of social innovation, will be explored and supported.
49. A three-pronged approach to promote private sector engagement will be accelerated:
(a) influencing the internal and external operations of businesses and building their capacity
to translate the Children’s Rights and Business Principles into tangible actions, including
support for internal CSR and sustainability policies such as due diligence guidelines; (b)
promoting the application of CSR as a process towards achieving results for children,
particularly in relation to provision of quality basic education, and; (c) mobilizing in-kind
resources from the private sector in the form of technical expertise, technological
applications, research and marketing, among others.
50. UNICEF will continue to engage with the Malaysian public, the private sector and the
Government to mobilize financial resources to support the realization of child rights in
Malaysia and other countries, including funding for humanitarian crises. UNICEF will aim

9/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

to increase funding from the Malaysian public and private sector, which reached nearly $11
million in 2014.

Programme effectiveness
51. Programme effectiveness will support all activities related to efficient and effective
programme, financial and human resources management in support of the three
programmatic components, along with monitoring and evaluation. Technical assistance,
human resources and operational costs will be supported through this component.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Enhanced child and adolescent well-being

1,500

5 000

6 500

Social inclusion and disparity reduction

2,000

5 000

7 000

Enhanced engagement and partnerships for
child rights

270

20 500

20 770

Programme effectiveness

500

4 250

4 750

4 270

34 750

39 020

Total

Programme and risk management
52. The Economic Planning Unit (EPU) of the Prime Minister’s Department will serve as
the main coordinating body for the management, implementation and monitoring of the
country programme. The contribution of UNICEF to the UNSPF will be monitored under the
National Steering Committee, co-chaired by the designated authority of the Government of
Malaysia and the United Nations Resident Coordinator, and supported through participation
in United Nations Theme Groups and UNSFP Outcome Working Groups, which will also
promote collaborative programming.
53. Private sector fundraising will serve as the major source of financial resources for the
country programme, supplemented by UNICEF core resources and an annual contribution
from the Government.
54. The major risk to the achievement of the country programme’s results for children is in
relation to macro-economic stability and the value of local currency, which could have an
impact on government prioritization of child rights as well as the targets for local private
sector fundraising. The risk to fundraising is mitigated through the high proportion of income
from long-term individual donors who have proven resilient in multiple countries during
recent years of economic turmoil. This will be further managed through the development of
a strategy to increasingly diversify income over a wider range of channels. Natural disasters,
particularly regular flooding in eastern Malaysia, may affect the achievement of results by
disrupting services and refocusing government priorities. The major mitigating actions will
be providing support to emergency preparedness and longer-term disaster risk reduction and
community resilience through joint United Nations system initiatives.

10/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

55. This country programme document outlines UNICEF contributions to national results
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures.

Monitoring and evaluation
56. In addition to the five-year joint country programme action plan, rolling multi-year
workplans will be developed and may be revised as a consequence of annual reviews,
evaluations and changes in the situation of children. In addition to the Costed Evaluation
Plan, a five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will guide detailed monitoring
and evaluation of the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of the country
programme.
57. Two major evaluations will be undertaken. The first will examine the role and
engagement of the private sector in the promotion and protection of child rights in Malaysia;
and the second will be a full evaluation of the country programme. These two analyses will
contribute to the evidence-base for the discussions on the post-2020 role of UNICEF in
Malaysia.
58. Systematic monitoring of the situation of children, and of the bottlenecks and barriers
constraining the realization of child rights, will be key elements of the monitoring and
evaluation framework. UNICEF will collaborate with the national authorities to improve the
generation of quality, disaggregated data to inform the development of policies and strategies
that ensure disparity reduction and social inclusion. In addition, UNICEF will also provide
the Government with joint support to strengthen national social sector monitoring systems,
with an emphasis on the use of innovative approaches and technology for real-time and
disaggregated data collection and analysis.

11/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

Annex
Results and resources framework
Malaysia – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child: Articles 3, 6, 18, 23-29, 37 and 39
National priorities: Eleventh Malaysia Plan, 2016-2020: Thrust II - Improving Well-being and Thrust III - Human Capital Development
UNSPF outcomes involving UNICEF: Outcome 1: Malaysia is designing and implementing effective policies and initiatives for eradicating poverty and
deprivation in all its forms, increasing inclusion and resilience of the poorest 40 per cent and reducing economic and gender inequality gaps; and improving
delivery of basic services and harnessing the benefits of development for the people (UNSPF pending finalization).
Outcome indicators measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution: (To be established)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s): 1-7
UNICEF
outcomes

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme outputs

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

Enhanced child
and adolescent
well-being

Level of compliance of the
child justice system with
international
standards/guidance which
Malaysia has committed
to.
Baseline: TBC
Target: TBC

Laws, policies,
information from
Ministries,
Committee on the
Rights of the
Child periodic
reports

1.1 Government, civil
society and private
sector have increased
capacities and provide
comprehensive and
well-coordinated
prevention and
response services to
children and families at
risk, or victims of
violence, abuse and
exploitation.

National
MWFCD;
MOE;
Attorney General’s
chambers;
Royal Malaysian Police;
Bar council;
Judiciary
UNHCR Malaysia;
MOH;
National Security
Council;
National Population and
Family Development
Board
Subnational
State governments

1. By 2020, all
children in
Malaysia benefit
from
strengthened
national policies,
quality social
services and
capacities that
enhance wellbeing and enable
them to survive,
thrive and

12/15

Percentage reduction in
proportion of children aged
2-14 who experience
violence, abuse and
neglect.
Baseline: TBD
Target : 10% reduction

Surveys

1.2 By 2020, increased
commitment and action
by Government,
schools and private

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome
(in thousands of United
States dollars)
RR

OR

Total

1 500

5 000

6 500

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

develop to their
full potential.

Ranking of Malaysia in
international benchmarks
(PISA, TIMMS)
Baseline:
Target: TBC

PISA and TIMMS
reports

Percentage of children who
complete five years of
secondary education
Baseline : Total/M/F
Target: Total/M/F

Education
Management
Information
System

Proportion of
undocumented, refugee
and stateless children
attending formal learning
classes. Baselines and
targets for each category to
be established.

MOE annual
reports

sector to improve
nutrition and healthy
eating practices of
children in Malaysia.

Federal Special Task
Force

1.3 National secondary
education outcomes
improve in relation to
international
benchmarks and
standards.

1.4 Increased provision
of quality education for
undocumented, refugee
and stateless children
and children with
disabilities.

Convention on the Rights of the Child: Articles 3, 12-13, 17-18, 26-27 and 30-31
National priorities: Eleventh Malaysia Plan, 2016-2020: Thrust I - Enhancing Inclusiveness and Thrust III (as above)
UNSPF outcomes involving UNICEF: Outcome 2: Malaysia adopts and implements policies to ensure universal access to quality education, universal
health coverage and employment services for vulnerable groups and communities, including people with disabilities, women, children, youth, the aging
population, people living with HIV, and the labour force; and the establishment of a comprehensive management system of the stateless, legal/illegal
migrants, victims of human trafficking and refugees. (UNSPF pending finalization)
Outcome indicators measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution: (To be established)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s): 1-7
Social inclusion
and disparity
reduction
2. By 2020,
strengthened
commitment and
environment
promoting child-

Percentage of children
living in households under
the national poverty line.
Baseline (2014): TBC
Target: % reduction per
year - TBC

Household
income survey
report (biannual)

Child-sensitive and
coordinated social

Government
reports

2.1. Increased capacity
of Government and
academic institutions to
plan, implement and
monitor child-focused
outcome-based
budgeting, and
produce, analyse and
use disaggregated data

National
EPU; - Ministry of
Finance
MWFCD;
MOE;
Attorney General’s
chambers;
Royal Malaysian Police;
Bar council;

2 000

5 000

7 000

13/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

centred social
inclusion, disparity
reduction and
resilience.

protection system adopted
and operationalized
Baseline: TBC
Target: TBC

and evidence on
children.
2.2 Strengthened childsensitive and
coordinated social
protection system.

Judiciary;
UNHCR Malaysia;
MOH;
National Security
Council
Subnational
State governments

Convention on the Rights of the Child: Articles 12-13, 15, 17 and 31
National priorities: Eleventh Malaysia Plan, 2016-2020: Thrust II - Improving Well-Being
UNSPF outcomes involving UNICEF: Outcome 4: Increased contributions by Malaysia, both directly and indirectly, to regional and global development,
health, peace and security as well as humanitarian aid and response through South-South and triangular cooperation and global development cooperation
goals as set out in the Sustainable Development Goals. (UNSPF pending finalization)
Outcome indicators measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution: (To be established)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s): 1-7
Enhanced
engagement and
partnerships for
child rights
3. By 2020,
enhanced
capacities,
partnerships and
engagement for
child rights
fulfilment and
monitoring, and
for mobilization of
national resources
for all children.

14/15

Number of companies that
incorporate elements of
CRBP
Baseline: 1
Target: 5

Number of regional and
global forums where
Malaysia promotes
children’s rights
PSF net income
Baseline: $11 million
(2014)
Target: 10% annual
increase

Survey report
Annual reports
from business
associations

Reports on
forums

Private sector
fundraising
income report

3.1 The Malaysian
private sector is aware
of its responsibility to
respect children’s
rights, and access
quality technical
support and capacity
for taking action on
implementing the
CRBP.
3.2 Strengthened
capacities of CSOs to
monitor child rights.
3.3 Regional and global
leadership on
promotion of child
rights by Malaysia is
increased.

National
MWFCD;
Department of Social
Welfare
Royal Malaysian Police
MOE
MOH
NGOs/CSOs

270

20 500

20 770

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.24

3.4 Increased private
sector fundraising
income for UNICEF
programme in
Malaysia, regionally
and globally.
Programme effectiveness
Programme
efficiency and
coordination

Percentage of country
programme outcomes and
outputs that are annually
reported as either on track
or achieved
Outcomes:
Target: Over 75%
Outputs:
Target: 100%

Annual review
reports

500

4 250

4 750

4 270

34 750

39 020

Internal reporting
database
Reports from
headquarters

Percentage of evaluation
recommendations
implemented, closed and
reported within 12 months
of uploading
Target: 100%
External relations
and
communication

Visibility of the work of
UNICEF Malaysia is
increased through media
and public advocacy,
events and campaigns
Target: Two multistakeholder events per
annum

Campaign and
media reports and
coverage

Total resources
_______

15/15

