Malawi
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Malawi
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.36) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Basic data†
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

8.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

110

Underweight

(%, moderate & severe, 2010)
(% urban/rural)

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted 2008)
Primary school net attendance (% net, male/female, 2008)

13
10/13
510 a
88/93

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2008)

42

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

80

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

56

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

11

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)

26

Birth registration (%, under 5 years)

—

GNI per capita (US$)

280

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

93

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

92

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org/.
a
675 deaths per 100,000 live births is the most recent estimated maternal mortality ratio
published by the national statistics office of Malawi, based on preliminary findings of the
2010 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey. In addition, 810 deaths per 100,000 live
births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Interagency
Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical
experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more
information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html/.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Over half of Malawi’s 13.1 million people are under 18 years of age, making it
one of the youngest populations in the region. According to the Population and
Housing Census 2008, 40 per cent of the population is 10-29 years of age. This
youth “bulge” in its population presents Malawi with opportunities to secure its
future competitiveness by effectively investing in the skills and education of the
present generation. A greater focus on youth will also contribute to poverty
reduction, improve productivity, reduce health costs and enhance social capital
formation. 1
2.
Although Malawi has made encouraging progress in economic development
and food security, the country remains constrained by rapid population growth
(estimated at 2.8 per cent), limited institutional implementation capacity, and a
narrow resource base. Poverty estimated at 39 per cent, according to the 2009
Welfare Monitoring Survey, is widespread and the proportion of ultr a-poor
households stands at 15 per cent. Malawi was ranked 166 out of 178 countries in the
2010 Human Development Report, making it one of the poorest countries in the world.
__________________
1

2

Population and Housing Census 2008; NSO projected population is 13.95 million for 2010 and
15 million for 2012, while the United Nations population projects a popu lation of 14.9 and
15.9 million for the same years.

3.
The 2007 Sentinel Surveillance Report showed that HIV prevalence in the
15-49 year age group had declined from 14 per cent in 2005 to 12.6 per cent in 2007.
HIV prevalence among young people 15-24 years of age is estimated at 6 per cent
and is higher among females (9.1 per cent) than males (2.1 per cent). Of the 84,000
new HIV infections recorded annually, 78 per cent occur among young people and
88 per cent are attributed to heterosexual transmission. 2
4.
Though HIV still contributes to at least one third of all maternal deaths and
20 per cent of all child deaths, there is progress. The transmission rate among
infants born to HIV-positive mothers declined from 16.5 per cent in 2008 to 13.8 per
cent in 2009. 3 In 2009, UNAIDS estimated that 920,000 Malawians were living with
HIV, including 120,000 children under 14 years of age. More than 230,000 people
are currently on antiretroviral treatment, among them 21,000 children, which
represents 23 per cent of children eligible for treatment. There is a critical need to
scale up prevention of mother-to-child transmission, paediatric care and treatment. 4
5.
There has been a decrease in maternal deaths, from 807 per 100,000 live births
in 2006 to 675 per 100,000 live births in 2010, but maternal mortality remains high.
Although 97 per cent of mothers receive antenatal care from a health professional, only
73 per cent of deliveries are done by a health professional (not necessarily accredited in
midwifery skills);5 however, 72 per cent of deliveries take place in a health facility,
compared to 54 per cent in 2006. 6 Critical shortages of competent health personnel,
long distances to health facilities, equipment shortages, and the high prevalence of
HIV, malaria and tuberculosis contribute to low facility-based deliveries.
6.
Malawi is on track to achieve Goal 4 on reducing child mortality. The unde rfive mortality rate is 112 deaths per 1,000 live births, declining from 145 in 2004.
Similarly, the infant mortality rate declined from 81 deaths per 1,000 live births to
66 per 1,000 live births over the same period. Behind this success is the
commitment to provide cost-effective interventions, including immunization. TB
vaccine coverage stands at 97 per cent, DPT3 and measles at 93 per cent and
vitamin A supplementation at 70.6 per cent. By 2009, 8.65 million insecticide treated bednets had been distributed in the country. Efforts to prevent mother-tochild transmission and provide paediatric HIV care and treatment have been scaled
up. Malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, however, still remain the leading causes of
illness and death among children under 5 and neonatal causes among infant deaths.
7.
Although stunting declined from 48 per cent in 2004 7 to 41 per cent in 2010, it
is still one of the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. While the overall rate of exclusive
breastfeeding increased from 62.7 per cent in 2000 8 to 71.9 per cent in 2010, it is at
41.8 per cent in the crucial ages of 4 to 5 months necessitating a shift from
treatment to prevention services.

__________________
2
3
4
5

6
7
8

United Nations General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS) Report, 2010.
UNGASS Report 2010.
Government of Malawi, Quarterly Programme Report, 2010.
Malawi Demographic and Health Survey, 2010; Preliminary Report. Unless otherwise indicated,
all 2010 figures are from this preliminary report.
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2006.
Malawi Demographic and Health Survey, 2004.
Malawi Demographic and Health Survey, 2000.

3

8.
Malawi has achieved an enrolment rate of 83 per cent, with gender parity in
the lower grades. 9 The education system is, however, characterized by insufficient
learning and teaching materials, inadequate infrastructure, a very high teacher -topupil ratio of 1:92, weak school management systems, and high repetition and low
completion rates to grade 8 (48.8 per cent). 10 These inefficiencies mean that the
country wastes 65 per cent of the educational resources every year. 11 In 2010,
77.9 per cent of schools had access to safe drinking water, while only 23 per cent
had access to adequate sanitary facilities. 12 Appropriate sanitation facilities play a
critical role in keeping girls in school. Current efforts in the education sector are
focused on improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the system.
9.
Approximately one third of children aged 3-5 benefit from early childhood
care and learning through 6,000 community-based child care centres. 13 Given the
known benefits of early learning on child development and future school
performance, there is a critical need to scale up early childhood development. The
Government is committed to, and has prioritized, early childhood development in
the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II (MGDS II).
10. Malawi lacks comprehensive statistics on child protection but the little
available data indicates that around 65 per cent of girls and 35 per cent of boys
experience some form of child abuse during their lifetime. 14 A third of girls in the
15-19 age group are married 15 and 26 per cent of children are involved in child
labour. 16 Nearly 13 per cent of Malawi’s children have lost o ne or both parents, half
of them to HIV-related illnesses. 17 Many of Malawi’s 837,300 orphaned children
live in poor communities that are unable to provide optimal care and protection,
leaving the children vulnerable to neglect, abuse and exploitation, and less than
10 per cent of children under 5 have a birth certificate. In 2010, the Government
enacted a comprehensive child care and justice bill and has included child protection
in the MGDS II.
11. Malawi has achieved the Millennium Development Goal on wat er, with 80 per
cent of the population accessing safe water. Nevertheless, approximately 30 per cent
of water sources are in disrepair. On sanitation, 88 per cent of the rural population
practises basic excreta disposal but challenges exist in access to improved sanitation
facilities, which now stands at 60 per cent. 18

__________________
9
10
11

12

13

14
15
16
17
18

4

Welfare Monitoring Survey, 2009.
Education Statistics 2010; Ministry of Education Science and Technology’s EMIS.
The Education System in Malawi: Country Status Report, World Bank Working Paper
No. 182 (2010).
Malawi School WASH 2008: A Status Report on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Primary
Schools.
Ministry of Gender, Children and Community Development, Early Childhood Development,
2010 Annual Report.
Intimate Partner Violence Study, 2005.
Government of Malawi, Population and Housing Census 2008.
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2006.
Government of Malawi, Population and Housing Census 2008.
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation 2010.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2011
Key results achieved
12. UNICEF continued to maintain its position as a key development partner to the
Government. Increased advocacy resulted in children being one of nine key
priorities in the MGDS II. The next country programme will build on this,
translating child-focused strategies into concrete results for children.
13. UNICEF played a critical role in the sector-wide approach (SWAp) to health
by supporting the re-costing of the Essential Health Package, development of the
road map for maternal and neonatal mortality reduction, procurement of HIV drugs,
procurement of HIV test kits and implementation of the Nati onal Framework for
HIV/AIDS. UNICEF participated in the evaluation of the programme of work and
the design of a new Health Sector Strategic Plan that defines interventions by level
of service delivery and proposes a package of cost-effective maternal, neonatal and
child health interventions. The new plan will facilitate equitable allocation and
leveraging of resources for children. UNICEF also assisted the Ministry of Local
Government and the Ministry of Health at the district level to use results -based
planning and to harmonize tools and planning processes for improving efficiency
and quality of health services.
14. The SWAp to education entered its first full year of implementation in 2010
and UNICEF played a key role in its formation when it chaired the E ducation Sector
Donor Group in 2009. The child-friendly schools’ principles, norms and standards
developed through UNICEF support were incorporated in the National Education
Sector Plan 2009-2017, which contains key priorities for achieving the Millennium
Development Goal on education. In May 2010, Malawi received a grant of
$90 million from the Fast-Track Initiative which will significantly contribute to the
implementation of the National Education Sector Plan.
15. UNICEF contributed to improving access to water by providing 2,550 water
points that serve 640,000 people and introduced the Community -led Total Sanitation
Initiative which has successfully triggered the construction and use of latrines for
281,000 people in 1,326 villages. The SWAp to the water, sanitation and hygiene
sector will improve coordination, sector reform, decentralization, and leverage
resources for the unserved poor.
16. UNICEF supported 3,500 community-based child care centres, reaching
350,000 orphans and other vulnerable children annually. Children 3-5 years of age
attend these centres daily and receive care and support, food and nutrition, early
learning and stimulation, hygiene and school preparation. The Early Childhood
Development Policy is in place and a five-year action plan [PLEASE GIVE
YEARS] aims to improve service delivery nationwide and raise awareness on the
importance of early childhood development.
17. The Child Care, Protection and Justice Bill was enacted in 2010. UNICEF
assisted the judiciary and the police to offer rapid and appropriate justice to women
and children and 4,000 child abuse and gender-based cases of violence reported to
the police were processed. Community victim support units were scaled up to 215
from 115 in 2008. They provide mediation, legal advice, hospital referrals, and

5

follow-up of prosecution cases, including follow-up of children diverted from
formal justice systems to community-based restorative mechanisms.
18. With UNICEF support, the Social Cash Transfer Programme improved the
lives of 30,452 ultra-poor households consisting of 68,425 children, of whom
53,615 are orphans. An evaluation of the programme in 2008 showed that it was a
major mechanism for poverty reduction in Malawi. The Government has increased
its budgetary allocations to the programme five-fold and has leveraged over
$20 million from development partners for scaling up.
19. In December 2009, the northern district of Karonga suffered two major
earthquakes measuring 5.9 and 6.0 on the Richter Scale. UNICEF responded within
72 hours by providing household items, water and sanitation, shelter, and learning
materials for the 38,000 people who were affected.
Lessons learned
20. Positioning children in the MGDS II and the role of UNICEF in key donor
groupings are effective strategies for influencing upstream decision-making and
leveraging resources for children. In line with the recommendation of the 2009
midterm review, UNICEF will pay greater attention to decentralized planning in
districts and local assemblies to ensure appropriate inclusion of children.
21. The Essential Health Package and the removal of user fees were pro -poor
strategies for achieving universal access to public health care and will need to be
analysed for impact. A more comprehensive and innovative equity focus is
necessary, shifting from a population and facility-based formula to a more needbased allocation of recurrent resources and introduction of alternative financing
mechanisms. Previously, interventions in nutrition focused mainly on management
of acute malnutrition and control of micronutrient deficiencies with minimal regard
paid to the persistently high levels of chronic malnutrition. A shift to community based preventive nutrition interventions is deemed necessary to reduce stunting and
will be spearheaded by a comprehensive nutrition, education and communication
strategy that UNICEF has helped to develop.
22. Subsidizing household sanitation was not sustainable and a shift to
Community-led Total Sanitation has enabled communities to build and sustain t heir
own latrines without subsidies. This approach has extended national coverage from
64 per cent to 66 per cent and played a decisive role in persuading the Government
to allocate resources to scale it up to establish an Open Defecation Free Malawi by
2014.
23. A lesson learned from the Karonga earthquake is that clarity on roles,
responsibilities and capacity gaps is necessary for an effective and efficient
response. Information on who was doing what and where was not readily available
and this led to uncoordinated efforts and delayed responses.

6

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

14 150

101 000

115 150

Development

8 000

56 250

64 250

Protection

6 600

46 500

53 100

Participation

6 730

3 150

9 880

11 470

8 100

19 570

46 950

215 000

261 950

Survival

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
24. The development of the 2012-2016 country programme was informed by
consultations during the development of the MGDS II and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), 2012-2016. Consultations were
held with the Government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), development
partners and resident United Nations agencies to review and agree on the outcomes
and outputs of the UNDAF. UNICEF held a consultative meeting with different
stakeholders to review and agree on UNICEF programme component results and
intermediate results and to align them with national prioritie s. The country
programme also takes into consideration the findings of the country assessment and
the concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on
Malawi’s report issued in 2009.
Programme and component results and strategies
25. The overall goal of the UNICEF country programme 2012 -2016 is to support
national efforts to progressively realize children’s and women’s rights through
improved child survival, development, protection and participation within the
framework of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Millennium Declaration.
UNICEF will focus its resources at three levels: policy and systems strengthening;
improved and equitable delivery of basic social services; and positive behaviour
change to benefit children. The following strategies will be instrumental in
achieving these results: (a) providing upstream technical guidance for policy
development, based on evidence and best practices; (b) formulating benchmarks and
standards to enable implementation, quality assurance and monitoring within the overall
decentralization process; (c) developing professional skills; and (d) establishing
mechanisms for community participation, implementation and monitoring of child
rights.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
26. The UNICEF country programme 2012-2016 will contribute to the following
priorities of the MGDS II: (i) child development; (ii) youth development and
empowerment; (iii) education, science and technology; (iv) public health, sanitation,

7

malaria and HIV/AIDS management; and (v) irrigation and water development. The
country programme will also contribute to the four themes of the UNDAF:
sustainable economic growth; basic social and protection services; HIV and AIDS;
and improved governance.
Relationship to international priorities
27. The country programme will contribute to Malawi’s efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, especially those related to gender, educat ion, and
child and maternal mortality. The country programme is in line with the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan and Core Commitments for Children in Emergencies
and will support Malawi to achieve goals set by A World Fit for Children, the 2001
Declaration on HIV and AIDS, the African Union Resolution and Commitment to
Accelerated Child Survival, the Global Partnership on Maternal and New -born
Survival, and the Abuja Declaration. The country programme’s strategies will
promote national ownership, capacity-building, and use of monitoring and
evaluation in line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Rome
Declaration on Harmonization, and the Accra Agenda for Action.
Programme components
28. The programme aims to achieve 13 results through four components: survival,
development, protection and participation. The programme will use regular
resources to strengthen national systems through SWAps and sector coordination
mechanisms and other resources to generate evidence, create demand and scale up
cost-effective interventions for children. The expected results are presented in
italics, with further details included within each paragraph.
29. Survival. This programme component is geared towards the achievement of
Millennium Development Goals 1, 4, 5 and 6, and will assist the Government in
enhancing policies, strategies and plans in health, nutrition, water, sanitation and
hygiene and HIV/AIDS within SWAps and sector coordination mechanisms. It will
play a major role in strengthening the capacity of district and community-based
structures to provide quality essential services and will promote adoption of child friendly practices. Major partners include the Government, district authorities,
NGOs, United Nations agencies and development associates.
30. National and district-level systems strengthened to scale up high-impact
preventive, promotive and curative nutrition interventions including family and
community care practices that impact on child survival and development with
priority to 15 underserved districts. The programme will contribute to strengthening
national health policy by using evidence, equity-based analysis, and innovative
approaches to financing. At service delivery level, it will strengthen the capacity of
health workers and model cost-effective interventions that save children’s lives. At
the community and household level, behaviour and social change will be supported
to promote effective maternal, new-born and child health-care practices. The
programme will support: (i) efforts to develop the Nutrition Act and incorporate
strategies in relevant sector-wide approaches and district plans; (ii) community
management of acute malnutrition; (iii) investments in sustainable approaches to
prevent malnutrition linked to infant and young child feeding; (iv) advocacy for
reducing stunting; (vi) quality assurance and surveillance systems for fortification;
and (vii) capacity for micronutrient supplementation.

8

31. Water, sanitation, and hygiene sector coordination mechanisms and service
quality improved to ensure that at least 83 per cent of women and children access
improved water supply facilities and 60 per cent of households use improved
sanitation facilities. The programme will contribute to the establishment of the
SWAp to more effective and efficient delivery of services to the underserved, and
also focus on prevention of diseases through improved rural water supply,
sanitation, hygiene services and health promotion for adoption of positive
behaviours.
32. National HIV/AIDS policy and strategy reviewed and the scaling up of services
supported to ensure that at least 80 per cent of children, adolescents and pregnant
women in 15 underserved districts have access to quality HIV/AIDS services by
2016. The programme will support evidence generation and equity analysis to
improve national policies, guidelines and strategies for prevention, treatment and
care. Support will be provided to increase treatment of under-five children and
adolescents, to build capacity for comprehensive prevention of mother-to-child
transmission, and supply chain management of HIV/AIDS drugs and test kits.
33. Development. This component will work towards the achievement of
Millennium Development Goals 2, 3, 4 and 6 with a focus on early childhood
development, quality basic education, adolescent development, participation and
policy, and prevention of HIV/AIDS among youth. It will work with the
Government, NGOs, United Nations agencies and development partners to achieve
the following results:
34. Evidence-informed early childhood policy, legislation, plans and budgets are
in place and implementation of interventions that target the most vulnerable
children are supported. The focus will be on putting in place legislation, regulatory
frameworks, standards and implementation guidelines to operationalize the Early
Childhood Development Policy and to scale up community-based child-care centres.
The outreach and parenting programme model will be developed for children under
3 years.
35. National education sector strategies and systems strengthened within the
education sector-wide mechanism to address low survival rates and high internal
systemic inefficiencies and support provided to ensure that schools in 10 low
performing districts record at least 50 per cent increased retention, lea rning
achievement, survival to grade 8 and transition rates to secondary education . The
programme will support: (a) implementation of the comprehensive child -friendly
schools model; (b) development of a national education assessment system for
monitoring quality standards of basic education; (c) teacher training with an
emphasis on females; (d) coordination, management, and monitoring and evaluation
systems for quality basic education; and (e) provision of gender- sensitive latrines
and safe drinking water.
36. Alternative education system strengthened to provide functional literacy and
numeracy skills for out-of-school youth, and systems developed to ensure that at
least 30 per cent of adolescents out of school in 10 selected districts, especially
girls, acquire livelihood skills. The programme will focus on out-of-school
adolescents (aged 14-17 years) and young people (aged 18-24 years), particularly
girls, in 10 selected districts through support to complementary basic education,
functional literacy and numeracy and demand-driven livelihood skills to improve
living standards.

9

37. National and district-level systems enabled to analyse, programme and
implement HIV preventive services, with a focus on adolescents and young people
in-and-out-of-school and ensure that at least 80 per cent access preventive services
in 10 high prevalence districts. The programme will support coordination,
management and reporting mechanisms at district level to harmonize effective
delivery of HIV prevention services in 10 high prevalence districts. It will support
school-based anti-AIDS clubs and, with the UNFPA, it will support service delivery
for HIV prevention in tea and coffee estates and in communities.
38. Protection. This component will support the Government to establish a
national child protection system and test models for care and support. It will
contribute to Millennium Development Goals 1, 2, 3 and 6 through two components:
(i) child protection; and (ii) social protection. It will work closely with the
Government, district assemblies and civil society organizations to improve access to
services; and promote birth registration, justice for women and children, and
protection of children in alternative care. The social protection component will
strengthen the National Social Support Programme. The programme will achieve the
following results:
39. An operational national child protection system that protects children from
violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect and mitigates the impact of HIV and AIDS
is in place. Priorities include fast-tracking the implementation of the Child Care,
Protection and Justice Act and the National Registration Act. A comprehensive child
protection model that includes a national child protection information management
system and targeted capacity building will be designed and tested for scale up
nationally.
40. Evidence-informed, equity focused and child sensitive operational guidelines,
coordination mechanisms, plans and budgets of the National Social Support
Programme (Social Protection Programme) are in place to support implementation
of interventions that target the most vulnerable children. The programme will
support the scaling up of the Social Cash Transfer Programme by strengthening the
national secretariat and 28 district councils to reach vulnerable households with a
regular monthly income. A comprehensive Cash Plus institutional model will be
developed and piloted in three districts to link cash transfers with improved access
to social services.
41. Participation. This component will promote the participation of women and
children in the planning, implementation and monitoring of the MGDS II and will
mobilize them to influence policy analysis, dialogue and sector reforms. The
capacity of district-level partners to use results-based management and the human
rights approach will be strengthened. The overall goal is to achieve Millennium
Development Goals 1-7. Key partners include the Government, district authorities,
the media, the private sector, NGOs, civil society organizations, United Nations
agencies and development associates. The following results will be achieved:
42. Child-focused evidence generated and used with the participation of children
to influence national policies, programmes, plans and budgets towards addressing
child equity and social exclusion. The programme will support equity and childfocused analysis to inform national economic policies and budgetary allocations.
Child and youth participation in the design and review of national policies,
legislation, plans and budgets will be enhanced. The capacity of the Government
and civil society organizations to provide timely and quality reports on the

10

Millennium Development Goals, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
other international treaties and conventions will be enhanced.
43. Partnerships with civil society, the media, the private sector and Parliament
established and strengthened for the promotion of child rights. The programme will
build on current achievements and promote innovative programming involving the
media, civil society, the private sector, children and legislators to create awareness
of child rights and support UNICEF’s overall advocacy and resource mobilization
goals.
44. The national systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation apply results based management and human rights-based approach principles in planning,
budgeting and programming with priority to 14 underperforming districts . The
programme will support national and decentralized capacity building,
institutionalize results-based management and human rights principles, and
strengthen data management systems, including the Malawi socio -economic
database.
45. Cross-sectoral costs will support programme delivery, through efficient and
effective implementation of governance systems and resourc e management; project
monitoring; emergency preparedness; and implementation of cross -cutting
programme functions, achieving the following results:
46. Effective, efficient programme management, operations support, and
programme delivery. The programme will ensure timely implementation of
organizational change initiatives, full compliance with risk management and
business continuity, contribute to joint United Nations activities, ensure timely
delivery of supply inputs, improve the office’s physical environ ment and safeguard
assets, and ensure there is effective and efficient management of financial and
human resources.
47. Effective, efficient cross-sectoral programme support. Programme delivery
will be supported through project monitoring, emergency prepa redness, and
implementation of cross-cutting programme functions. Emergency preparedness will
focus on national capacity development under the umbrella of the Humanitarian
Country Team while at the district level, UNICEF will focus on preparedness of
various sectors and integrate disaster risk reduction.
Major partnerships
48. The 2012-2016 country programme will continue its strong partnership with
the Government of Malawi, United Nations agencies, development partners, civil
society organizations, and district assemblies. Alliances for advocacy, fund-raising
and enhanced programme implementation with private sector and faith -based
organizations will be strengthened. UNICEF will continue to support the NGO
Coalition on Child Rights to submit an alternative report on the implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The partnership with Parliament will
continue to be strengthened to maintain its oversight function, especially in review
of laws. The capacity of the media will be strengthened to ensure that children’s
issues receive appropriate coverage.

11

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
49. The Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of UNICEF will be aligned to
the UNDAF so that periodic evaluations can be undertaken jointly. UNICEF will
enhance the use of the Malawi socio-economic database as the key monitoring tool
for the MGDS II and the Millennium Development Goals. Support will be provided
to the Government to track information on emergencies. A joint United Nations
midterm review will take place in 2014 to review progress under the country
programme and the UNDAF.
50. The Ministry of Development, Planning and Cooperation will remain the focal
ministry for coordination, while line ministries will be key implementing p artners of
the country programme. UNICEF will co-lead and participate in appropriate sector
working groups as dictated by the Government’s aid architecture. The main
programme management tool will be Rolling Work Plans. The Harmonized
Approach for Cash Transfer modality will continue to be used for cash assistance to
implementing partners.

12

