E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Maldives
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Maldives is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $ 4,250,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $5,023,460 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

1/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

Programme rationale
1. Maldives is a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) with a 2014 population of 399,939,
including 58,683 foreigners,1 which is a 14 per cent increase since the last census in 2006.
The country is spread out over 90,000 square kilometres with 188 inhabited islands, making
it one of the world’s most geographically dispersed countries. According to the 2006 census,
children (aged 0–17) represent 39 per cent of the population.2 The capital city, Malé, accounts
for 38 per cent of the total population (census 2014); expatriates account for 13 per cent of
the population in Malé. With an average ground level elevation of 1.5 metres above sea level,
Maldives is the planet’s lowest country, which has significant implications for its future.
2. Maldives graduated to middle-income country status in 2011, having shown remarkable
economic growth of almost 6 per cent between 2000 and 2009,3 largely due to the rapid
expansion of tourism. The country attained a gross national income (GNI) per capita of
$5,750 in 2012.4 This growth took place despite the global economic crisis and the 2004
Indian Ocean tsunami. Moreover, by 2008, Maldives had achieved five of the eight
Millennium Development Goals ahead of schedule, making it the only ‘MDG Plus’ country
in South Asia. The Maldives Human Development Index (MHDI) of 0.688 in 2012 (Maldives
Human Development Report, MHDR, 2014), makes it the highest ranking country in South
Asia, and 103rd out of 187 countries globally.5 Despite these impressive developments, the
data mask challenges and significant inequalities.
3. The State party Report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child (2012)6 noted that
one of the principal challenges facing the country is the result of numerous changes in
Government, mainly due to increased political tensions. This has had a significant impact on
the timely passage of important social legislation and delivery of key child-related social
services. While the country embarked on a decentralization process in 2010, the intended
improvements in the social sectors through devolution of some municipal services to Atoll
and Island Councils have not been realized.7 The graduation to middle-income status has also
negatively impacted the public debt portfolio as concessional loans and favourable trade
conditions have deteriorated markedly, presenting threats to the country’s future
development. Additionally, its SIDS profile, geographical dispersion and isolation of small
islands, susceptibility to climate change and high vulnerability to natural hazards present the
greatest constraints to the country’s development and the welfare of its children.
4. While Maldives has made significant strides in social and economic development, this
progress has not benefited all Maldivians equally. Disparities in outcomes for children have
several dimensions, including geographic, income, education and age. The main driver of
inequality and vulnerability is the population’s geographical dispersion. Spatial disparity
between Malé and the atolls contributes significantly to the human development gap, mostly
in the form of income and education choices. The MHDI for Malé is 0.734 compared with

1

Population and Housing Census 2014, Preliminary Results, National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of
Finance and Treasury, 13 November 2014.
2
Situation of Children in the Republic of Maldives: Secondary analysis of existing information from an
equity perspective, UNICEF, 2013.
3
Maldives Human Development Report (MHDR), 2014, Ministry of Finance and Treasury and UNDP.
4
MHDR 2014.
5
MHDR 2014.
6
Committee on the Rights of the Child, Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports, Republic Of Maldives, 1
September 2012.
7
Study on the Decentralization Process in the Maldives, UNICEF, 2013.

2/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

0.627 for all of the atolls.8 Malé performs far better in expected and average years of
schooling and earnings compared to the atolls. There are also noticeable differences within
the regions, for example, in 2009, the poverty ratio in the northern region was 72 per cent
compared with the north-central region, 32 per cent.9
5. Income disparities are the second most influential driver of inequality. Tourism and
connectivity are key drivers in setting income levels, 10 which in turn determine better access
to social services. A widening income inequality gap was recorded in Malé (2009–2010),
with the richest 10 per cent of households holding almost half of the total income. While
overall poverty decreased during the period 1997–2010,11 the rate of poverty increased for
Malé, from 2 per cent in 2003 to 7 per cent in 2010.12 The decrease in the atolls was primarily
as a result of outmigration to Malé for better employment opportunities and improved access
to services, mainly education. A critical social inclusion issue is the growing sense of
disenfranchisement and exclusion that young Maldivians feel, and the corresponding
perception that the country’s youth are “idle and disconnected from the fabric of society.”13
6. Maldives has a fully state-funded universal health insurance programme (as legislated
in the 2011 National Health Insurance Scheme Act), which covers the entire population.
Despite the achievements of the health-related Millennium Development Goals and
significant resources allocated to the health sector, malnutrition among children presents the
most critical public health concern. Rates of stunting, underweight and wasting among
children under five in 2009 were, respectively, 19 per cent, 17 per cent and 11 per cent. Rates
of malnutrition and educational attainment in the north-central region were worse than in
Malé. For example, in 2009, stunting rates were 23 per cent versus 16 per cent, wasting more
than twice as high (15 per cent versus 7 per cent), and underweight was also more than twice
as high (24 per cent versus 11 per cent).14 Neonatal mortality rates also remain a concern.
Other emerging issues include anaemia and obesity, with 6 per cent of children under five
and 24 per cent of adolescents obese in 2009.15 There is also the risk of HIV and AIDS and
sexually transmitted infections among young people due to an increase in unsafe sex and
risky behaviours. Bottlenecks in the enabling environment include negative social norms and
weak monitoring and quality assurance systems. From the demand side, a preference for
packaged foods, inadequate child-feeding practices, and, for some, lack of affordable,
nutritious food, pose key challenges to proper nutrition. On the supply side, system-wide
challenges include capacity gaps among health staff and low quality of services. Further,
institutional capacity for coordinated emergency preparedness and response in the health
sector is weak.
7. While significant progress has been achieved over the past 15 years in attaining
universal primary education (99 per cent) and lower secondary education (82 per cent), there
has been a significant reduction in the rate of transition to higher secondary education (24
per cent) in 201416, with major societal implications given the growing number of out-of-

8

MHDR 2014.
Statistics Handbook, Department of National Planning, Ministry of Finance and Treasury, Maldives 2012.
10
MHDR 2014.
11
Household and Income Survey, 2012.
12
Mid-Term Review, Maldives UNICEF country programme, UNICEF 2013.
13
‘Youth in the Maldives: Shaping a new future for young women and men through engagement and
empowerment’, World Bank, 2014.
14
Maldives Demographic and Health Survey, 2009.
15
Ibid.
16
School Statistics 2014, Ministry of Education, Maldives, 2014.
9

3/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

school children. The south-central region has the highest mean years of schooling (5.45
years) compared with the north-central (4.21) and southern (3.45) regions.17 The quality of
education remains a critical concern at all levels. National assessments indicate poor learning
outcomes at all levels of education. The average pass rate at lower-secondary level is at 47
per cent, with major disparities between Malé (58 per cent) and the regions (30 per cent).18
Children with disabilities have inadequate access to educational opportunities. In 2014, only
52 out of the 219 schools across the country provided some form of education for children
with special needs. Support from UNICEF included establishing a baseline and rolling out
an inclusive school curriculum (2014/15), institutionalizing life skills and improving teacher
capacity in special education needs.19 However, supply-related bottlenecks to the
achievement of quality education remain. These include weak teaching and learning
methodologies, high turnover of secondary schoolteachers, and an ineffective system of
ensuring proper hygiene and sanitation, especially as it affects girls. In addition, inadequate
resources for emergency preparedness and lack of capacity of school management and
teachers to respond is a challenge. Bottlenecks in the enabling environment include the
difficulty of accessing small and dispersed island populations, inadequate monitoring of
adherence to national standards, and insufficient advisory/pedagogical support to
disadvantaged schools.
8. The most critical child protection issues include violence against children and drug
abuse among adolescents. Studies reveal that there is a clear correlation between youth
unemployment and the abuse of drugs and high rates of juvenile crime.20 Low rates of
educational achievement coupled with limited access to career guidance and life skills
predispose children to delinquent behaviours and crime. For instance, 61 per cent of juvenile
offenders reported to the Juvenile Justice Unit (JJU) were school dropouts, with 40 per cent
of the cases related to drugs and another 18 per cent linked to violent assaults.21 Gang
violence is on the rise and becoming more brutal. There is growing evidence that a number
of children involved in criminal behaviour were first in contact with the system after
themselves having experienced violence. Limited access to recreational and sports
opportunities is also considered a contributor to the increase in adolescent drug abuse. The
preliminary results of the National Drug Use Survey – Maldives 2011/2012 show that 48 per
cent of drug users in Malé are aged 15 to 19 (compared with 18 per cent in the atolls).22
9. Violence against children exists in the home, school and community. A 2009 study
indicated that 28 per cent of boys and 19 per cent of girls under age 18 have experienced
emotional or physical punishment at some point in their lives. 23 Nationally, 15 per cent of
children attending secondary school reported that they had been sexually abused at least once,
with prevalence rates among girls double that among boys. The southern region has highest
rate of unregistered births (14 per cent), highest teenage childbearing rate (3.2 per cent) and
the largest cohort of children engaged in economically productive work (54.5 per cent).
According to the Assessment of the Alternate Care Institutions for Children (Ministry of
Gender and Human Rights, 2013, unpublished), 35 per cent of children are from the southern

17

MHDR 2014.
‘Human Capital for a Modern Society: General education in the Maldives – An evolving seascape’,
World Bank, 2012.
19
School Statistics 2014, Ministry of Education, Maldives.
20
National Drug Use Survey (NDUS) – Maldives 2013, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
MHDR 2014.
21
Administrative data, Juvenile Justice Unit, Maldives 2014.
22
NDUS Maldives 2013.
23
‘National Study on Violence against Children in the Maldives’, UNICEF (unpublished, 2009).
18

4/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

region. Child protection systems mapping and assessment identified multisectoral systemic
and enabling environment issues such as lack of comprehensive legislation, tools and
protocol and implementation guidelines, and weak coordination mechanisms. Supply
bottlenecks include lack of institutional and human capacity and intersectoral mechanisms to
provide an efficient and timely response to violence against children, including in
humanitarian settings; and lack of quality standards and adherence to existing procedures,
which limit the quality of care. Demand-side barriers include discriminatory attitudes by
communities towards children who have experienced sexual abuse, lack of awareness and
the widely accepted belief that issues related to sexual abuse these are ‘family issues’.
Important pieces of legislation such as the Juvenile Justice Bill and the Child Rights, Child
Care and Protection Bill are still pending, while enforcement of the Law on the Protection of
the Rights of the Child (Law No. 9/91) and related provisions in existing legislation is weak.
Foster care is constrained by the lack of families willing to take on older children.
10. As the State party Report (2012) noted, children with disabilities continue to face an
array of obstacles and remain subject to discrimination. The Maldives Operational Review
2012 noted that teachers lack the skills necessary to work with children with disabilities and
to detect learning difficulties among students. 24 The impact of poverty has been greatest on
children, with 18 per cent of the poor being children.25 Despite the country’s achievement of
‘MDG Plus’ status and the Government’s establishment of a number of social protection
programmes, there are bottlenecks to social inclusion. These are mostly due to a constrained
enabling environment, particularly weak generation, analysis and use of data and evidence to
better target beneficiaries for social protection programmes. Supply bottlenecks include
abolishment of the coordinating body (Department of National Planning, which housed the
National Planning Council) in 2014, constrained capacity to analyse and use disaggregated
data, including data to prepare and implement the humanitarian response. On the demand
side, inadequate awareness of existing social protection programmes limits the ability of
disadvantaged groups to make claims.
11. Given the country’s SIDS profile and the increasing evidence and impact of climate
change, Maldives is highly vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly coastal flooding, storm
surges and tsunamis. Land scarcity, coupled with limited utilization options and a growing
population, also contribute to the country’s vulnerability to multiple hazards. Bottlenecks to
improving the country’s readiness to deal with disasters include the absence of a childsensitive legal, policy and institutional framework for disaster risk reduction and
management, and in particular for climate change adaptation, coupled with weak institutional
capacity.
12. Both the mid-term review and a recent evaluation of UNICEF country programme
strategies26 noted that, despite an overly ambitious programme design and the shift to
upstream advocacy in a challenging political environment with major fiscal challenges, the
collaboration was able to influence the Government. This was achieved through systematic,
evidence-based advocacy to prioritize a child-centred equity agenda. Key lessons from the
last country programme that guided the design of the 2016–2020 programme include: (a)

24

ICPD Beyond 2014, Maldives Operational Review 2012, United Nations Population Fund and
Department of National Planning, Maldives, 2012.
25
Situation of Children in the Republic of Maldives: Secondary analysis of existing information from an equity
perspective, UNICEF, 2013
26
Evaluation of UNICEF Strategies in Addressing issues Affecting Women and Children in the Maldives,
2015, UNICEF Maldives.

5/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

sustained engagement with the Government to leverage evidence, policies, programmes and
budgets to close equity gaps is critical to the mandate of UNICEF in a middle-income country
context; (b) intersectoral collaboration among key social sectors is crucial in tackling
common barriers to addressing the deprivations that children face. For instance, for the
Ministry of Education (MOE), Ministry of Law and Gender (MOLG), Maldives Police
Service (MPS) and JJU, working together was more efficient and effective in addressing
child protection issues; (c) reinforcing strategic partnerships between the Government and
civil society organizations, enhanced capacity for social accountability, monitoring and
reporting on equity in service quality and coverage.

Programme priorities and partnerships
13. The overall goal of the country programme is to support the Government of Maldives
to reduce inequities and disparities and achieve the progressive realization of the rights of all
children, especially the most vulnerable. In line with the national development priorities of
the country, UNICEF contributes to the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) 2016–2020, particularly Outcome 1: Children and youth access and use equitable,
inclusive and quality social services, and have increased opportunities for skills
development. In line with the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014–2017, the programme will
leverage the organization’s convening role to build partnerships with key social sectors and
partners at all levels. The programme design adopts an evidence-based, policy advocacy and
institutional strengthening approach in addressing the barriers that affect the most
disadvantaged.
14. Partnerships with various entities will be developed in order to leverage resources and
results for children: (i) United Nations agencies under the UNDAF, for instance, with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in promoting
vocational skills development for out-of-school adolescents; the World Bank in social
protection systems and public expenditure reviews; the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in health systems strengthening; and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in environment and climate change
issues; (ii) non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to support strengthening systems at the
local island level, monitor and report on results; and advocate for the rights of children; (iii)
private sector for policy advocacy and leveraging resources, tapping into the country’s
profitable tourism industry to increase results for children; and (iv) other government entities
to help to promote an equity agenda for children. The country office will also develop and
implement a strong resource mobilization strategy that focuses on private sector partnerships.
15. The country programme will incorporate gender equality and implement the UNICEF
Gender Action Plan by addressing social and cultural norms with corresponding interventions
using an equity-focused approach. The country programme will focus on two outcomes, as
stipulated in the text that follows.
16. Outcome 1: Inclusive, equitable and quality social services for children (and
adolescents), especially the most disadvantaged and vulnerable are improved by 2020.

Child health, nutrition, and HIV and AIDS
17. The UNICEF focus in this programme area will cover neonatal and child health and
development, and child, adolescent and maternal nutrition. This is consistent with both
national priorities and responses aimed at reducing malnutrition, neonatal mortality and child

6/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

morbidity rates, with a focus on high-prevalence regions. Output results include: (i) a
comprehensive mechanism for child and adolescent nutrition interventions strengthened,
especially in regions with high malnutrition rates; (ii) policies and strategies for
implementation and monitoring of inclusive and equitable child health programmes
developed and implemented.
18. The programme will focus on strengthening institutional capacity for child, adolescent
and maternal nutrition interventions and integrating hygiene promotion and safe water use;
developing policies, frameworks and capacity on neonatal and child health and
immunization; and developing national systems to address micronutrient deficiencies and
HIV and AIDS. Additionally, UNICEF will support systems strengthening for generation
and use of disaggregated data, which will be used to monitor results and to inform gendersensitive policies and strategies. Support will be provided to strengthen capacity and
coordination for health emergency preparedness and response. UNICEF will partner with
local NGOs to promote nutrition at community and family levels and advocate for quality
services; and with WHO and UNFPA in health systems strengthening, newborn care and
immunization.

Education and water, sanitation and hygiene
19. The focus in the quality education and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
programme emphasizes inclusive and alternative education for the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable children and adolescents, consistent with government education policies and
priorities of addressing the poor quality of education at all levels. The correlation between
poor educational achievement and delinquency and crime will be addressed through crosssectoral linkages between MOLG and the Ministry of Youth and Sport (MOYS). In addition,
support will be provided to MOE to operationalize school improvement and the quality
assurance and accountability framework (SIQAAF), and to institutionalize life skills at all
levels of the national curriculum, and technical vocational education and training
programmes at the lower secondary level. The priorities under this outcome include: (i)
strengthen implementation and monitoring of an inclusive, child- and gender-sensitive
curriculum; (ii) establish and operationalize an alternative education system for the most
vulnerable children.
20. Partnerships will be enhanced with UNESCO (to promote vocational skills
development for out-of-school adolescents) and the World Bank (to improve education
quality). UNICEF will focus on strengthening institutional capacity for implementation of
the SIQAAF, and generation and use of data for monitoring quality education, including
learning achievements and education in emergencies. In partnership with the Ministry of
Health (MOH), UNICEF will strengthen integration of hygiene and sanitation in educational
settings. Further, partnerships will be developed with the private sector, particularly in skills
development for out-of-school children. In partnership with the National Disaster
Management Centre (NDMC), education sector planning and coordination in emergencies
will be strengthened, to ensure continuation of quality education during emergencies.

Child protection
21. The child protection programme will aim to create a holistic child protection system at
national and community levels to prevent, protect and respond to violence against children.
Addressing the principal bottlenecks, the priorities include (i) child protection system
effectively prevents and responds to violence against children and children in conflict with

7/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

the law, and prevents drug abuse; and (ii) an effective national coordination and monitoring
mechanism operational for timely response to violence against children and children in
conflict with the law.
22. By adopting a systems approach, the programme will support the Government to
establish a national multisectoral coordination mechanism to monitor the effectiveness of
policies, programmes and services, and outline the accountabilities of duty-bearers across
relevant sectors. In addition, it will strengthen institutional capacity at the national, atoll and
community levels and create a framework for provision of psychosocial support to children
who have experienced abuse. Furthermore, capacity will be strengthened at the MOLG and
Family and Child Service Centres to establish a continuum of care. Institutions at island
community level will be strengthened to address negative beliefs, attitudes and practices and
build capacity for humanitarian response. Partnerships will be forged with NGOs to
strengthen systems at the local island level, to monitor and report on results and advocate for
children’s rights; and with the private sector for policy advocacy and leveraging resources.
23. Outcome 2: Evidence generated for policy advocacy for inclusion in social services by
2020

Social inclusion
24. The social inclusion programme includes a strategic approach to addressing
multidimensional poverty and its attendant deprivations and vulnerabilities. The programme
aligns with the Government’s focus on strengthening systems for social inclusion, which
includes detailed analyses and use of disaggregated data for policy responses to child poverty.
To achieve this, three outputs have been articulated; (i) Systems for generating evidence are
strengthened at national and subnational levels for inclusive and equitable policies, plans and
services, especially for the most disadvantaged; (ii) Social protection systems are
strengthened to improve the focus on the most vulnerable, and (iii) Child- and gendersensitive disaster resilience and climate change adaptation plans and programmes are
institutionalized and operational at national and subnational levels.
25. The programme interventions will include strengthening national and subnational
capacities for generation and use of data and evidence for policymaking, planning and
programme development, and periodic analyses of data on inequities, including climatically
vulnerable populations and advocacy on inclusive policies and strategies. Further, support
will focus on institutional capacity for equitable social protection schemes with functional
coordination and monitoring mechanisms. Additionally, the programme will promote child
and gender-sensitive resilience and climate change adaptation, notably by supporting the
integration of child-centred, multi-hazard risk assessments into development plans at national
and local levels. It will also support establishment of a national council to promote and
monitor national policies and programmes on disaster and climate resilience. Partnership will
be sought with the World Bank to strengthen social protection systems and conduct public
expenditure reviews, working with the National Social Protection Agency and the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS).

Choice and mix of strategies
26. While the country programme utilizes a combination of sectoral and intersectoral
approaches, it is conceived as an integrated whole, with each sectoral component
incorporating good practices and initiatives for scale up. Each outcome contributes to the

8/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

relevant UNDAF outcome area and the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014–2017. The
interventions seek to influence actions at national and subnational levels of Government with
an emphasis on equity. A human rights-based approach and gender lens have been used in
the development of this programme and will be applied in its implementation.
27. Key implementation strategies include capacity development aimed at strengthening
institutional and human capacities, evidence generation and use for advocacy and policy
dialogue, and integration and cross-sectoral linkages employed to create programmatic
synergies and systems for holistic results for children. In addition, South-South and triangular
cooperation will be facilitated to share best practices and promote learning. A strong focus
will also be placed on the identification and promotion of innovation, especially in reaching
marginalized and disadvantaged small populations in remote islands. Finally, the country
programme will focus on creating strategic partnerships with the private sector, particularly
the tourism industry, for technical and vocational skills development and adoption and
monitoring of child rights business principles.
Summary budget table

Programme component

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
Other
resources
resources
Total

Health, nutrition and HIV/AIDS
Education and water, sanitation and
hygiene
Child protection

1 085

1 054

2 139

616

1 628

2 244

1 079

1 200

2 279

Social inclusion

944

889

1 833

Cross-sectoral

525

252

777

4 249

5 023

9 272

Total (rounded)

Programme and risk management
28. This country programme document outlines the contributions made by UNICEF to
national results for children in Maldives. It serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for alignment of results and resources assigned to the programme at country
level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and
operations policies and procedures. Through the harmonized approach to cash transfers
(HACT) framework, UNICEF will focus on ensuring a risk-informed programme and an
emphasis on programme monitoring.
29. In recognition of the country’s middle-income status, management of the programme
is firmly anchored in an upstream strategy that underscores all component results. The
programme is results-based, which corresponds to the importance the Government places on
achieving results, as embodied in the UNDAF. The programme approach facilitates interagency coordination through the mechanism of the UNDAF Steering Committee (co-chaired
by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) and the Resident Coordinator’s Office), and four
Outcome Technical Committees organized under the following outcome areas: children and

9/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

youth; gender; governance; and environment and climate change. UNICEF co-chairs
outcome 1 (children and youth) with MOE and MOYS. UNICEF will promote integration of
sectors and activities through joint programming, and monitoring by the Government and
concerned United Nations agencies. The management approach also recognizes the
decentralized governance structure in Maldives, and will accordingly coordinate its
programmes at the atoll and island levels.
30. The principal risks fall largely in the area of governance. Frequent changes in
Government and a decentralization programme that appears to have an unclear future have
left accountabilities among and between national-level actors and devolved governments
unclear. As a result, the implementation of policies and programmes, especially for the most
vulnerable populations, is often constrained. Policy inconsistencies have resulted in an
untapped potential for corporate social responsibility by the private sector, while the
significant increase in public debt and deficit is deemed to have an impact on budget
allocations, which affects all Maldivians – especially those most vulnerable. At just 1.5
metres above sea level, the country is always one major storm away from significant adversity
and possibly a major disaster. Mitigation measures include: monitoring of results and
sustained evidence-based advocacy with policymakers; promotion of partnerships,
particularly with the private sector and coalitions at all levels of Government that support the
achievement of equitable outcomes for children; diversifying and leveraging funding sources;
closely monitoring implementation of the HACT; continuous monitoring of results through
field visits and periodic reviews and evaluations; and strengthening risk-informed
development planning, including early warning mechanisms, emergency preparedness and
response.
31. The United Nations country team will establish relevant mechanisms to coordinate
planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the UNDAF. To operationalize the
country programme, annual workplans will be developed together with government partners
and, where appropriate, jointly with other United Nations agencies.

Monitoring and evaluation
32. Systematic analysis and monitoring of the rights of children is a critical element in the
country programme planning-to-learning and knowledge management cycle. It will further
collaboration with the existing structures and institutions, such as the NBS, the relevant
ministry departments of planning, and academic institutions such as the Maldives National
University. Evidence for policy dialogue with partners will be generated from research and
analysis of bottlenecks, sector assessments and updates to the situation of children, as well
as from performance monitoring. Engagement by UNICEF partners at the national and
subnational levels in programme planning, implementation and monitoring is intended to
develop their capacities for social accountability for child rights, particularly among the most
vulnerable.
33. Data from the 2014 census, the 2016 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, the
2015 Demographic and Health Survey, the MaldivInfo database and other administrative
sources will be strengthened and mined to profile the deprivations faced by children and
leverage national resources to close the equity gaps.
34. The Monitoring Results for Equity System will be used to systematically monitor the
situation of children and adolescents and reduction of disparities and inequities, including
bottlenecks that hinder the achievement of results. In close collaboration with the MOFA

10/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

under the UNDAF, and with key line ministries, regular programme reviews will be
conducted to identify progress and barriers and make adjustments.
35. In alignment with the UNDAF, the Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will
identify and track studies, surveys and evaluations. Together with the UNDAF Steering
Committee and technical groups, UNICEF will monitor the UNDAF and its outcome results,
and report on its contribution in coordination with partners. A fully costed Evaluation Plan
is annexed to this CPD. The programme will track and document progress against planned
results through annual and mid-term reviews.

11/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

Annex
Results and resources framework
Maldives – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016–2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child: Education: articles: 28 & 29: Health & social security: 6, 23-24, 26: Protection: 9, 19-20, 25, 33-34, 36-37, 39-40
Millennium Development Goals: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7
Global/Regional Partnerships: A Promise Renewed (child survival); Every Newborn action plan; Rome Declaration on Nutrition;
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC): South Asia Call for Action on Ending Violence against Children; SAARC Social Charter
National priorities: Government of Maldives Manifesto 2013
UNDAF outcomes involving UNICEF contribution:
 Outcome 1: By 2020, children and youth access and use equitable, inclusive and quality social services, and have increased opportunities for skills
development.
Outcome indicators1
o % of children who are malnourished in the selected high-prevalence regions (National prevalence used as proxies)
 i. Stunted under-five (U5): Baseline (B)= 18.9% , Target (T)= <15%
 ii. Wasted U5: B= 10% U5, T= <5%
 iii. Overweight/obese U5: B= 7%, T= <5%.
 iv. Overweight/obese adolescents girls aged 15–19 years: B= 23.5%, T= < 15%
o Neonatal mortality rate: B= 6 deaths per 1,000 live births, T= 2 deaths per 1,000 live births
o % children fully immunized for vaccine-preventable diseases mandated by the national immunization schedule: B= 93%, T= 98%;
o % of students passing five or more subjects in their secondary school completion examinations: B= 48% (2013). T= 60% (2020)
o % of atolls with functional child protection systems: B= 0, T= 50%
 Outcome 2: By 2020, gender equality advanced and women empowered to enjoy equal rights and opportunities in access to social, economic and political
opportunities.
Outcome indicators
o % of men and women who think that a husband or partner is justified in hitting or beating a wife or partner under certain circumstances: B= Men:
25.7%, Women:45.1%, T= Men: 20%, Women: 40%
 Outcome 3: By 2020, citizen expectations for voice, sustainable development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic
governance.
Outcome indicators
o % increase in budget allocated for children by sectors: B= 0, T= 10%
o Number of sectors with functional child-sensitive monitoring data systems: B=2, T= 9

1

12/15

Maldives Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS), 2009.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31



Outcome 4: By 2020, growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, increase resilience to climate change and disasters, and contribute to
enhanced food, energy and water security and natural resource management
Outcome indicators
o Number of sectors that have DRR (disaster risk reduction), climate change adaptation and resilience integrated into relevant sectoral plans and/or
strategies: B= 0, T= 7

Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s): Strategic Plan 2014–2017
Outcome 1: Health; 2: HIV; 3:WASH; 4: Nutrition; 5: Education; 6: Child protection; 7: Social inclusion
UNICEF outcomes

OUTCOME 1:
Inclusive equitable
and quality social
services for children
(and adolescents),
especially the
disadvantaged and
vulnerable are
improved by 2020

Key progress
indicators, baselines2
and targets3

1. % of children under
five who are
malnourished in
selected regions with
high prevalence of
malnutrition.
i. Stunted: U5. B=
18.90%, T= <15%.
ii. Wasted U5: B= 10%,
T= <5%
iii. Overweight
/obese U5: B= 7%,
T= <5%.
iv. Overweight/obese
adolescent girls aged
15–19 years: B=
23.5%, T= < 15%
(National prevalence
used as proxies)4

Means of
verification

Monthly
Reports;
Health
Management
Information
System;
Demographic
and Health
Surveys

Indicative country
programme outputs

Comprehensive mechanism
for child and adolescent
nutrition interventions
strengthened, especially in
the regions with high
malnutrition rates.
Policies and strategies for
implementation and
monitoring of inclusive and
equitable child health
programmes developed and
implemented.

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

NGOs/communitybased organizations
(CBOs) for
behaviour change
communication in
maternal and child
nutrition; WHO on
newborn care and
immunization

Indicative resources by CP
outcome (in thousands of
US dollars)
RR

OR

TOTAL

2 780

3 882

6 662

2

Baselines are 2014 unless otherwise stated.
Targets are for 2020 unless otherwise stated.
4
MDHS, 2009.
3

13/15

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

2. % of schools meeting
quality standards
consistent with childfriendly, inclusive
gender-sensitive
quality education.
B= 5%,
T= 40%
3. % of out-of-school
adolescents (girls and
boys) completing
alternative education
programme.
B= Girls: 0%,
Boys: 0%,
T= Girls: 50%
Boys: 50%

MOE/School
Annual reports

Strengthen implementation
and monitoring of inclusive,
and gender-sensitive
education.

Education
Management
Information
System

Alternative education system
for the most vulnerable
children established and
operational.

4. Percentage of atolls
with functional child
protection system.
B= 0%
T= 50%

Sectoral Annual
reports; Review
reports

Child protection system
effectively prevents and
responds to violence against
children and children in
conflict with the law, and for
prevention of drug abuse.
Effective national
coordination and monitoring
mechanism operational for
timely response to violence
against children and children
in conflict with the law.

OUTCOME 2:
Evidence generated
for policy advocacy
for inclusion in

14/15

1. Number of sectors
with fully functional
child-sensitive
monitoring and data
systems

Sector agency
reviews/reports

Systems for generating
evidence and monitoring are
strengthened at national and
sub-national levels for
inclusive and equitable

MOE and Ministry
of Environment and
Energy on WASH;
World Bank and
MOE on quality
education;
UNESCO and
MOYS on
alternative
education for outof-school children

Collaboration with
CBOs/NGOs to
support vulnerable
children;
partnership with
MOLG, MPS, Atoll
and Island
Councils, JJU, and
Juvenile Court, for
prevention and
responding to
violence against
children and
children in conflict
with the law.
Ministry of Finance
and Treasury, Local
Government
Authority (LGA),

944

889

1 833

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.31

social services by
2020

Cross-sectoral

B= 2 (2015); T= 9

2. Percentage of
vulnerable children
and adolescents
benefiting from social
protection schemes.
B=0%, T=40%
3. Number and
proportion of islands
with child-centred
disaster management
(DM) plans.
B= 12 (6%) (2015)
T = 94 (50%)
Number of childcentred cross sectoral
events
B=3; T= 10

policies, plans and services,
especially for the most
disadvantaged.
Social protection systems
strengthened to improve the
focus on the most vulnerable.

NBS, MOE, MOH,
MOLG.

Sector agency
reports/
publications

Child- and gender-sensitive
disaster-resilient and climate
change adaptation plans
institutionalized and
operational at subnational
levels.

LGA, NDMC,
NGOs, relevant
sectors, Atoll and
Island Councils

Annual reports

Media and partnerships
established and effectively
promote child rights with a
focus on equity.

Media, private
sector, NGOs,
ministries and
communities

Survey reports
Sector reports/
publications

TOTAL

525

252

777

4 249

5 023

9 272

_______

15/15

