Mexico
Country programme document
2014-2018

The draft country programme document for Mexico
(E/ICEF/2013/P/L.15) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2013 second regular session (3-6
September 2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 February 2014.

Basic data †
(2011 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2012)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

3
..
50 a

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

94

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

85

One year olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

97 b

One year olds immunized against measles (%)

98 b
99/100

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2010)

94/96

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years, male/female)

0.2

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)

..

Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female)

6/4

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2009)

93 d

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org.
The figure reported in the above table is the adjusted MMR estimate prepared by the
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. The reported MMR estimate at the
country level is 43 deaths per 100,000 live births (2011), as presented in the Ministry of
Health and National Population Council (CONAPO) estimates, 2013.
The immunization figures reported in the above table are inter-agency estimates prepared by
WHO/UNICEF. The data, disaggregated by sex, are as follows: DPT3 male 95% and female
93%; measles male 81% and female 83%, UNICEF calculations based on data from the
National Health and Nutrition Survey (ENSANUT), 2012.

.
Data are based on an indicator definition that differs from the standard. This estimate refers to
prompt registration within the first 11 months of life, rather than standard of registered
children under age 5.
**

2

17

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female,)

c

21.6/20.6

Data refer to new estimates made by Mexico derived from a demographic conciliation
process made public in June 2013, due to new population projections. Data are available
at:http://www.conapo.gob.mx/es/CONAPO/Proyecciones
and
http://www.objetivosdedesarrollodelmilenio.org.mx

../.., 98/82, ../.. c
9 240

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Mexico is the world’s eleventh-most populated country, 1 with 118 million
people, 42,2 million of whom are children and adolescents under 18 years of age.
Mexico was the world’s twelfth-largest economy in 2011. 2 Important advances have
been made in health, education and social protection coverage for children in recent
years. However, stark inequalities and lack of protection from violence remain the
main challenges for children’s social inclusion and rights fulfilment. Approximately
4.7 million children live in extreme poverty, 3 77.4 per cent of children in indigenous
schools have poor results in primary school achievement tests in Spanish, 4 and 6 out
of 10 children report having experienced violence at home or in school. 5 Important
constitutional human rights reform in 2011 incorporated the “best interests of the
child” principle, which is opening the way for legislative and institutional reforms to
address historical legal, institutional and policy fragmentation in child rights matters.
It will have ramifications in future policymaking and judicial decisions.
2.
Children who face the highest levels of deprivation are those living in rural
southern areas, in large households, whose parents have a lower level of education
and are unemployed or working in the informal sector. 6 The highly fragmented nature
of health and education services, which have varying quality standards, affects
particularly rural, indigenous and marginalized areas. Increasing fiscal capacity and
making public spending more progressive with inclusive social policies are key to
reversing inequalities.
3.
A new Government took office in December 2012. With the National
Development Plan for 2013-2018, an initial agreement was reached with main
opposition parties to prioritize 95 commitments ( “Pacto por México”) to address the
fulfilment of social and economic rights. With a special emphasis on the quality of
education, a constitutional reform was approved in 2013.
4.
Based on national averages, most Millennium Development Goals indicators
have improved, but disaggregated data still show inequalities and exclusion. If current
trends persist, reaching the targets on maternal mortality, HIV/AIDS , gender equality
and environmental sustainability will be unlikely. 7
5.
In 2012, 21.2 million children and adolescents (53.8 per cent) were living in
poverty 8. In 2010, the proportion of children living in extreme poverty was five times
__________________
1
2
3

4

5

6

7

https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html.
Consejo Nacional de Evaluación de la Política de Desarrollo Social (CONEVAL), Encuesta
Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (ENIGH)-Módulo de Condiciones
Socioeconómicas (MCS), 2012.
Secretaría de Educación Pública, Estadística. Evaluación Nacional del Logro Académico en
Centros Escolares (ENLACE). http://enlace.sep.gob.mx/ .
UNICEF 2009, Gender Violence in Schools: Survey on Exclusion, Intolerance and Violence in
Senior High Schools (2009).
UNICEF-CONEVAL, Pobreza y derechos sociales de niñas, niños y adolescentes en México,
2008-2010. México (2012).
Presidencia de la República, Los objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio en México–Informe de
Avances 2010 (2011).
8 CONEVAL. Op.cit. 2012

3

higher in rural areas than in big cities (26.6 per cent vs. 4.6 per cent). 9 Among the
indigenous population under 18, the incidence of poverty was 76 per cent. 10 Despite
the fact that a higher proportion of children living in rural areas are poor (70.7 per
cent in 2010), 47.5 per cent of children in poverty are living in urban areas (7.6 million
rural vs. 13.8 million urban). Although there are no real differences in poverty levels
between boys and girls (51 per cent vs. 51.9 per cent), 11 poverty is relatively higher
(55.5 per cent) for those youngest (0-5 years). 12 Progress has been made in reducing
the child mortality national average, and Mexico will likely meet Goal 4 in 2015.
While under-five mortality decreased from 47 per 1,000 live births to 16.7 between
1990 and 2011 13, it remains high in southern states with larger proportions of rural
indigenous communities. The neonatal mortality rate was 7 in 2010. 14
6.
Although the Goal 1 target of 7.1 per cent prevalence of underweight among
children under 5 was achieved in 1999, recent data on health and nutrition 15 reveal
concerns: stunting remains at 13.6 per cent (almost 1.5 million children).
Consistently, the highest incidence is registered in southern rural areas (27.5 per
cent).The numbers of children considered to be overweight and obese continue to be
of concern. The combined prevalence among primary school-age children (5-11
years) is 34.4 per cent and among adolescents (12-19) 35 per cent, or 6.3 million. 16
7.
The maternal mortality ratio 17 has declined since 1990 from 89 deaths per
100,000 live births to 43 in 2011, but Mexico is unlikely to reach the Goal 5 target of
22 by 2015. 18 Maternal mortality in Guerrero state (90) is five times higher than in
Tamaulipas (15.7), the lowest in the country in 2011. National efforts have addressed
this issue but more are needed so that comprehensive strategies can be developed to
guarantee women’s timely access to quality obstetric care facilities and quality
prenatal care.
8.
Mexico made significant progress in ensuring children’s gender-equal access to
basic education, (reflected in the universalization of primary education and a
significant number of girls attending all basic education levels). Still, more than
6 million children aged 3-17 are out of school, (52 per cent boys). Significantly, 48 per
cent of out-of-school children are preschool age and 36 per cent are upper-secondary
school age, despite the fact that these two levels are mandatory. The net attendance
rate (2011/2012) is 70.7 per cent in preschool, 102.3 per cent in primary, 82.4 per cent
in secondary, and 52.9 per cent in upper secondary. 19 Access to upper secondary
education, though increasing, needs to be widened to overcome great disparities.
Indigenous girls lag 10 percentage points behind non-indigenous girls in accessing
__________________

UNICEF-CONEVAL, op. cit .p.59.
Idem, p.11.
11 Idem, p.49.
12 Idem, p.51.
13 http://www.objetivosdedesarrollodelmilenio.org.mx
14 UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children 2012, p.89.
15 Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (INSP), Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición
(ENSANUT), 2012.
16 INSP, Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición (ENSANUT), 2012.
17 See: http://www.objetivosdedesarrollodelmilenio.org.mx
18 Idem.
19 In Mexico, preschool covers children aged 3-5 years old, primary education covers children
6-11, secondary education covers adolescents 12-14 and upper secondary covers adolescents
15-17.
9

10

4

high schools, with 41.8 per cent of the former not attending. A 6 percentage point gap
exists between indigenous and non-indigenous boys attending upper secondary
education. 20
9.
Quality remains a significant challenge. Gaps persist between students attending
various educational modalities (e.g., private, public, indigenous, etc.). According to a
2013 national evaluation, Evaluaciόn Nacional de Logro Académico en Centros
Escolares (ENLACE), 21 77.4 per cent of indigenous children in primary schools have
poor Spanish-language achievement, as do 58.3 per cent in general primary. In general
secondary education, 83.1 per cent of students achieved elemental and insufficient
scores in the subject of Spanish, and 80.5 per cent of students in tele-secondary (the
modality offered in most marginalized urban and remote rural areas). Another
challenge lies in retention, especially at secondary level. While the national dropout
rate in primary education (2010/2011) was 0.7 per cent, it was 5.6 per cent for lower
secondary and 14.9 per cent for upper secondary. Regarding dropout, girls show lower
rates than boys in all educational levels. Recent data on child labour (2011) indicate
that three million children (5-17 years) work, of which almost 40 per cent are not in
school.
10. While Mexico has advanced social policies, among the main bottlenecks for
children’s access to protection services stems from a decentralized legal framework,
the insufficient coordination of services and the need for clear mandates and
responsibilities among different sectors and government levels. Moreover, there exists
no commonly agreed concept of child protection obligations. A weak culture of child
rights rebounds in a number of rights violations, including the fact that 10.5 per cent
of children aged 5-17 are engaged in child labour. 22 What is more, 54.5 per cent of
the population believes that children are physically abused and 24.8 per cent believes
that the use of physical punishment is justified to ensure children ’s obedience,
moreover 3.6 per cent believe children have no rights, and 27.6 per cent believe
children only have rights conferred by their parents. 23 As a result, neither rightsholders nor duty-bearers are able to easily identify and act upon child protection risks.
Overall, the construction of an integrated child protection system with clear
responsibilities at all administrative levels is both a challenge and an opportunity for
Mexico. The same holds true for implementing common standards across a
specialized juvenile justice system.
11. Children and adolescents are impacted by the upsurge in social violence
resulting from rivalry among organized crime groups, and the consequent s ecurity
operations. 24 The homicide rate almost tripled between 2007 and 2011 (from
__________________
20

21

22

23

24

UNICEF estimates based on the 2010 Census, ENIGH 2010, and Encuesta Nacional de
Ocupación y Empleo (ENOE), 2011.
Secretaría de Educación Pública, Estadística. Evaluación Nacional del Logro Académico en
Centros Escolares (ENLACE). http://enlace.sep.gob.mx/.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI)/Secretaría del Trabajo y Previsión Social
(STPS), Módulo de Trabajo Infantil (MTI)/Encuesta Nacional de Ocupación y Empleo (ENOE),
2011.
Encuesta .Nacional sobre Discriminación en México (ENADIS), 2010. Consejo Nacional para
Prevenir la Discriminación (CONAPRED).
Official figures attribute an estimated 47,515 deaths from December 2006 to September 2011 to
rivalry between organized crime groups, criminal activities and civil and military security operations
in response www.presidencia.gob.mx/base-de-datos-de-fallecimientos, www.pgr.gob.mx/temas%
20relevantes/estadistica/estadisticas.asp.

5

8.2/100,000 to 23.5; 42.9 for the male population). It more than doubled for those
under 18. 25 Adolescent boys are the predominant victims of homicide. However, girls
under 18 comprise 17.2 per cent of the victims of feminicide. 26
12. In sum, relative economic growth and progress in social policy have not yet been
sufficient to guarantee the rights of all children and adolescents. Nevertheless, the
unique opportunities resulting from the 2011 Constitutional Reform to establish
working governance mechanisms for child rights and child protection at all levels of
the federation, and the reform agenda of the new administration, open a window to
closing equity gaps.
13. In 2012 the Mexican Government presented its fourth and fifth reports to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child. In its 2011 Concluding Observations regarding
implementation of the two Optional Protocols, the Committee highlighted the need
for improved overall coordination of child rights policy, for information systems on
violence against children, for prevention, response and rehabilitation policies related
to both protocols, and for child-appropriate judicial procedures. The Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women expressed concern in 2012 about
the impact on women and girls of increased social violence, the phenomenon of
feminicide, the lack of legal harmonization throughout the country and the uneven
implementation of laws on prevention of violence against women and trafficking in
persons. The Committee also drew attention to the issue of pregnancies among
adolescents.
14. Since Mexico is vulnerable to natural disasters, national capacities for
emergency preparedness and response are well developed and have usually been
effective at all government levels. The Government is capable of responding to
disasters promptly and effectively, minimizing impact on families and especially on
children. The country is well prepared for situation-monitoring, early warning, and
disaster risk assessment.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2013
Key results achieved
15. Previous cooperation reinforced a role for UNICEF in Mexico: making all forms
of exclusion visible and unacceptable while strengthening national and subnational
coordination and capacities to address them through the development of inclusive and
child-centred policies, laws and budgets.
16. A child-focused perspective with an equity lens was brought to the natio nal
agenda on a range of emerging issues through UNICEF evidence -based advocacy and
support to arising national priority platforms. The issues related to migration and
gender violence, birth registration, and articulation of early childhood development
(ECD) policies. The specific impacts of poverty and the financial crisis on children
__________________
25

26

6

According to the Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud, Secretaría de Salud/ Censo 2010,
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía/Estimaciones de la Población 2010-2030,
CONAPO, it went from 1.6 to 3.9/100,000 in 2011, and for adolescents aged 15 -17 from 5.3 to
15.82/100,000 in that same period.
ONU Mujeres, Instituto Nacional de las Mujeres, Cámara de Diputados. Feminicidio en México.
Aproximación, tendencias y cambios, 1985-2009.

were underscored in a 2009 study by CONEVAL and UNICEF, conducted to inform
integrated and targeted poverty and disparity-reduction strategies. 27 Since 2010, with
the Ministry of Finance and the Federal Congress, UNICEF has supported public
expenditure analysis. As a result, the federal budget now specifically identifies
spending on children, 28 a first step towards improving the targeting and effectiveness
of social programmes.
17. A 2012 national study on out-of-school children and barriers to inclusion among
all age groups, which furthered understanding of key bottlenecks in the education
sector, was used as a reference for the education reform. Regular national data
collection on child labour 29 and birth registration 30 was instituted in partnership with
the National Statistics Institute to drive policymaking in these areas.
18. UNICEF established an online DevInfo-based information system
(www.infoninez.mx) that became the “go to” reference for disaggregated data and
policy analysis on child rights. Additionally, official and United Nations data on child
and maternal mortality were harmonized to facilitate a common ground for policy
discussion.
19. UNICEF contributed to positioning ECD programming so as to increase
children’s access to quality and culture-sensitive ECD services. Through partnership
with a range of institutions, UNICEF introduced a child rights approach to strategic
areas in ECD, mobilizing institutional resources, modifying operational rules of
public programmes, and generating commitments and key alliances. Specific methods
for increasing educational inclusion of children at all levels of education were
developed in partnership with state and federal governments. In the context of the All
Children in School initiative, the states of Chiapas, Oaxaca, Yucatán and Zacatecas
use new tools to monitor and secure school access and retention, taking into account
the large indigenous and migrant populations in the states. In Chiapas, 40,000
additional children were included in school between 2007 and 2012. To increase the
quality of school environments and prevent secondary school dropout, adolescent
participation was encouraged and methodologies instituted. Now, 1.3 million
adolescents in senior high schools nationwide participate annually in a federal
Ministry of Education adolescent life-skills programme derived from a UNICEF
methodology and scaled up through a United Nations joint programme.
20. Migrant children benefit from new laws, budgets, policies, practices and training
for specialized child protection migration officers, all of which are shared
internationally for replication or adaptation through South -South cooperation.
Mexican practical experience and evidence on child protection systems have been
enhanced through the development of inter-institutional protocols responding to
violence, especially gender violence, in disadvantaged urban and rural contexts,
addressing specific vulnerabilities of indigenous girls.
21. Resource mobilization strategies were developed as a core function of the
country programme. Nearly 50 per cent of other resources are raised locally, and there
__________________
27
28
29

30

See http://www.unicef.org/mexico/spanish/mx_CrisisUNICEFbaja.pdf.
http://www.infoninez.mx/inversion-social-2012.
http://www.inegi.org.mx/est/contenidos/Proyectos/Encuestas/Hogares/mo dulos/mti/mti2011/
default.aspx.
http://www.inegi.org.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/integracion/especiales/
derecho_ident/Derecho_a_la_identidad.pdf.

7

was a 92 per cent increase in pledge donors over the past five years. Private sector
alliances leveraged ‘value chains’ of corporations in the retail, banking, publishing,
pharmaceutical, food and telecommunications sectors. These partners acted as
stakeholders in promoting child rights agendas, beyond their role as donors.
Lessons learned
22. As identified in the midterm review, building flexibility into the country
programme was crucial in responding to emerging issues impacting on children
(financial crisis, migration, organized crime, influenza AH1N1) . It allowed new
opportunities to be grasped as demands for actions arose at national and subnational
levels. This agility to respond to emerging demands and opportunities and support
innovative policies with intervention models was also pertinent to the g rowing SouthSouth cooperation agenda of Mexico.
23. The effectiveness of UNICEF evidence-based advocacy lies in constant and
high-quality technical support for the institutions to introduce the human -rights-based
approach to planning and budgeting. Combining targeted evidence-based advocacy
with social awareness and mobilization, such as communication for development, has
proven more sustainable in reinforcing a rights-based culture, and uptake of policy
initiatives.
24. A sharpened equity focus, with the introduction of the Monitoring Results for
Equity System and the Multiple Overlapping Deprivation Analysis, calls for a
modified approach to cooperation at subnational level. It also calls for both promoting
and maintaining good capacity development for supporting the generation of
harmonized and disaggregated data on children and analytical work to support
policymaking. The role of UNICEF is advisory. Partnerships with centres of
excellence have specialized in key domains such as the human ri ghts-based approach,
indigenous education, child-focused budget formulation, emergency preparedness
and inter-institutional protocols in response to violence. These areas have
demonstrated good potential for building capacity at subnational level. Harnessi ng
such expertise to provide technical assistance can complement the broader strategy
for building subnational capacity to address all children’s rights.
25. Despite the country’s already-developed capacities in data collection and
analysis, challenges remain in securing adequately disaggregated data on key child related indicators through harmonized data collection, particularly in child protection.

The country programme, 2014-2018
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Policy analysis and knowledge generation
System-building for child rights and
protection
Early child and primary school-age child
development with equity

8

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

2 632

3 150

5 782

550

6 500

7 050

54

4 425

4 479

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

67

5 500

5 567

Adolescent development and participation
Social and resource mobilization for the
rights of children and adolescents
Cross-sectoral
Total

0

9 662

9 662

467

6 763

7 230

3 770

36 000

39 770

Preparation process
26. As part of the United Nations country team (UNCT), UNICEF contributed to
the Common Country Assessment finalized early 2013 and to the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) signed in March 2013. The country
programme was based on the outcomes of these documents, with the Summary
Results Matrix in line with UNDAF results matrix and with the final draft of the
UNICEF Strategic Plan for 2014-2017.
27. The country programme reflects the results of the 2010 midterm review, annual
reviews, and continued consultations with Ministries, with key counterparts at
national and subnational levels, and with strategic allies. Mexico presented its fourth
and fifth reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child by mid -2012. The
country programme will provide due consideration to the observations derived from
both reports, while also providing follow-up to observations derived from the third
report, particularly those dealing with indigenous and migrant children, promotion of
increased social investment, and data availability. Follow-up will also be given to the
concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women (2012), especially those on violence against women and girls.
Programme components, results and strategies
28. The overall goal is to support national efforts to accelerate the realization of the
rights of children and adolescents, as stated on the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, by focusing on reduction of disparities and inequities and contributing to
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and the goals and targets of the
post-2015 development agenda.
29. To achieve this goal, the programme will focus on strengtheni ng national and
local capacities and coordination for the implementation of child -related policies and
programmes with a human rights-based approach to influence national and
subnational legislation, planning and budgets, especially in favour of the 21. 2 million
children who live in poverty. Evidence-based advocacy will be used for promoting
pro-child, gender-sensitive and culturally pertinent policies, laws and budgets.
UNICEF will use its convening role for strengthening strategic partnerships and
alliances with different sectors, including public-private partnerships and engagement
with non–governmental organizations, centres of excellence, academic institutions,
the media and policymakers. UNICEF will also provide high-level technical
assistance in key areas and facilitate the exchange of knowledge among countries.

9

30. The subnational programme strategy will seek to cover all states with different
approaches, based on the situation analysis of children in each state and considering
the government cycle of each state.
31. For system-building across sectors, UNICEF will emphasize more integrated
and equitable policies and services for the youngest girls and boys (0 -5) and for
adolescents (12-17). The programme will contribute to strengthening institutional
mechanisms to secure access to rights and services for the most deprived and excluded
children and adolescents.
32. Gender analysis and gender-based programmatic and policy instruments will
help to make the disparities affecting girls and boys visible.
33. Mexico is strongly placed to share its knowledge and experience in emergency
preparedness and disaster response widely within the region, through international
and South-South cooperation. In this context, UNICEF will continue to support
subnational and national efforts to strengthen a child rights focus in implementing
disaster risk reduction and preparedness strategies, especially preparedness in
schools, and psycho-social support capacity.
Programme components
Programme component: Policy analysis and knowledge generation
34. This component will strengthen national and subnational capacity of
policymakers for generating quality disaggregated and gender-sensitive data for
evidence-based situation analysis on children, social policy tracking and
recommendations, and budget and expenditure analysis, with a focus on reducing
inequities and child poverty. At the federal level, the work will revolve around
ensuring an equity focus for social programmes for children provided by federal
government counterparts, so that all children have access to quality services. At the
subnational level, work will focus on increasing the capacity of local actors to
generate, analyse and use data to prioritize actions to fulfil rights for the most
disadvantaged children.
35. This component will focus on making sure that child -focused research and
evidence are available to decision makers and contribute to policy debates. To
improve the coverage of social programmes benefiting the most disadvantaged
children, UNICEF will work with line Ministries and the Ministry of Finance at the
federal level. Activities will include supporting local research and evidence generation and direct monitoring of government programmes and policies by civil
society and academic institutions. This will ensure that (a) the people intended to be
reached by programmes (e.g., social protections systems), the most excluded and
disadvantaged girls and boys, are included, (b) that budgets are sufficient and
equitably distributed to guarantee the rights of all children, and (c) that a full range
of indicators of child rights are monitored based on standardized data collection
methodologies.
Programme component: System-building for child rights and protection
36. This component focuses on strengthening institutional mechanisms across
sectors for more integrated, equitable policies, programmes and systems to ensure
protection of children against violence, abuse and exploitation. UNICEF will respond
to the unique opportunity provided by the 2011 Constitutional Reform on child rights

10

matters, offering technical assistance and international expertise, for
operationalization of effective policy coordination and child protection mechanisms
across sectors at national and subnational levels. This will involve suppor ting
legislative and institutional reform, and capacity-building for effective national and
local child rights promotion and protection systems. To protect children from violence
and exploitation throughout their life cycle, UNICEF will support the develop ment of
effective special protection mechanisms, including access to social care and justice at
all levels of the federation. This will involve work with social assistance, health,
education, security and justice sectors, improving their capacity to work t ogether to
prevent, detect and respond to violence and exploitation against children in the home,
school, community and institutions, including in residential care and juvenile justice.
A particular focus will be on strengthening the operational capacity o f those who work
in social assistance and justice to adopt child-sensitive and gender-sensitive protocols
and working practices.
Programme component: Early childhood and primary-school age child
development with equity
37. This component addresses strengthening national capacities to promote early
child and child development, especially for the most marginalized children. UNICEF
will promote programmes that improve caregivers’ capacities to ensure the fulfilment
of rights of the youngest children, supporting government efforts to strengthen the
role of families and institutions. Specific actions include increasing the knowledge of
families and other caregivers: on children’s rights, on their own capacity to promote
these rights, and on accessing relevant services in their communities. This includes
increasing access for the 1.6 million children under 5 who live d in extreme poverty
in 2010. UNICEF will support national development policies of the Government and
subnational capacity to address pressing issues: birth registration, undernutrition,
vaccination, early education, developmental monitoring and the prevention of
violence through better coordination of gender and culturally sensitive integrated
services in early childhood development. School-readiness and children’s inclusion,
participation and completion of primary schooling will be promoted. Special attention
will be paid to educational inclusion for indigenous children, particularly girls in rural
areas, to the cultural relevance of curricula and to teaching methods.
Programme component: Adolescent development and participation
38. This component focuses on redressing gaps in public provision for adolescents
and the promotion of adolescent participation and citizenship. In line with the
National Development Plan of Mexico, UNICEF will promote the expansion of
opportunities for positive adolescent development by aiming to increase adolescents´
inclusion, participation and completion of quality education. Efforts will promote
educational attainment and prevention of school dropout through the creation of
school and community environments that are more inclusive and participatory.
Expanding opportunities for adolescent girls and boys to be involved in school
governance and their access to arts, culture and sports will be promoted. Emphasis
will be given to fostering the resilience of adolescent girls and boys in the context of
social exclusion, violence and exploitation. Strategies in these areas will consider the
importance of preparing adolescents to prevent early pregnancy and realize their
reproductive rights. Special attention will be paid to multiple deprivations, racism and
discrimination affecting indigenous adolescents, and to the 2.2 million adolescent

11

girls and boys who are not in school, of whom 41 per cent are indigenous. Harnessing
the effective voice and engagement of adolescents in their communities and their
nation as a resource for positive change will be facilitated through the use of new
technologies.
Programme component: Social and resource mobilization for the rights
of children and adolescents
39. Successful advocacy vis-à-vis relevant stakeholders and mobilization aimed at
promoting social dialogue and cultural changes around child rights are the combined
factors that will allow child rights to be at the core of public agendas. They require
robust, visible and clear communication. For this reason, strong communication
strategies will be established through media and other channels, including modalities
to engage youth audiences in social dialogue.
40. Communication modalities will be essential for UNICEF to raise funds for the
country programme, which will increasingly rely on local contributions. A strong
fundraising and licensing programme will also be key to secure the fu nding needed
to implement programmes for children. The local fundraising strategy will be to
provide opportunities for the public and private sectors to contribute to the promotion
of child rights in Mexico and beyond. Inclusion of Business Principles for Children’s
Rights within Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives will remain an important
line of work for UNICEF.
Programme component: Cross-sectoral
41. This component will include all those activities related to programme
management and operations support (cross-cutting functions, providing management
oversight, operational support training, logistics, travel and other areas).
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
42. The Government has defined five national targets within the Na tional
Development Plan 2013-2018. 31 The country programme will support national efforts
in all of them by contributing to reducing disparities that affect the universal
fulfilment of the rights of children and adolescents. At the same time, the country
programme responds to the priorities derived from the recent Constitutional Reform
on child rights matters, the government strategy aimed at reducing food insecurity in
selected municipalities, the “Pacto por México” and the educational reform.
43. The programme supports the achievement of four of the six UNDAF priority
cooperation areas: (i) equality, equity and social inclusion; (iv) citizen security, social
cohesion and justice; (v) democratic governance; and (vi) alliance for development.
Relationship to international priorities
44. The country programme is based on the principles of the two human rights
conventions cited above. It also incorporates key international priorities reflected in
the framework of the Millennium Development Goals and discussio ns on the post2015 development agenda. The country programme also contributes to the
__________________
31

12

These are: (i) Mexico in Peace, (ii) An Inclusive Mexico, (iii) Mexico with Quality Education, (iv)
Mexico with Prosperity, and (v) Mexico with Global Responsibility. http://www.pnd.gob.mx.

achievement of commitments included in the initiative Committing to Child Survival:
A Promise Renewed, through strategic alliances with the Government, civil society
and the private sector. Given the refocus on equity foreseen for the next UNICEF
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017, the country programme will establish monitoring and
analysis mechanisms using and producing highly disaggregated data and policy
recommendations, in order to address different kinds of disparities affecting the
fulfilment of children’s rights.
45. The programme responds to the 2021 Education Targets, subscribed to in 2010
by Mexico within the Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and Government, 32
and to the declaration of the 2008 inter-ministerial meeting for the prevention of HIV
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Major partnerships
46. UNICEF will play an active role in the UNCT through joint programming
initiatives, and individual initiatives in partnership with other agencies. In the public
sector, the main counterparts are the central government Ministries and agencies as
well as subnational authorities and entities to support implementation of national
policies and programmes with an equity focus. When appropriate, UNICEF will
strengthen its advocacy efforts by joining forces with the National Network of Child
Rights Organizations and civil society coalitions for children’s rights. A range of
strategic partners will continue to be a cornerstone of cooperation in Mexico, drawing
on and adding value to the work of civil society, the private sector, academic
institutions and think tanks, national and international non -governmental
organizations, women’s organizations, organizations of persons with disabilities, and
community and faith-based organizations, both at national and subnational levels.
47. Partnerships with the private sector will remain a key strategy for leveraging
and mobilizing resources. Recognizing the strong corporate sector, UNIC EF will
continue to expand its private sector fundraising and in-country partnership.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through the Mexican Agency for International
Development Cooperation, has overall responsibility for coordinating and monitoring
the country programme. Programme monitoring will be reinforced to ensure progress
towards planned results and to monitor the equity orientation of interventions,
including a gender focus. Programme monitoring of subnational workplans will be
revisited from an equity perspective. Annual reviews of the workplans, with key
counterparts and rights-holders, and the midterm review in 2016 will serve these
purposes.
49. Monitoring of the rights of children and adolescent will be at the core of the
country programme, alongside analysis of the barriers and bottlenecks affecting their
fulfilment, through the use of key tools, including DevInfo, for database management.
50. Strong evaluation capacity within the country continues to be an asset for
UNICEF cooperation activities, not only locally but also regionally and
internationally in terms of possible South-South cooperation actions.

__________________
32

http://www.oei.es/metas2021 .

13

