Republic of Moldova
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for the Republic of
Moldova (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.5) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8
June 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2008)
Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female, 2009)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2008)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%)
Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)
Adult HIV prevalence (%, 2009)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2009)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2000)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)
One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)
One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)
†
a

b
c

0.8
19 a
3
2/4, 5/1 b
32 c
91/90
95
96
85
0.4
16
98
98/98, 98/98, 97/98
1810
90
97

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
The country-reported estimate is 13 deaths per 1,000 live births, according to the National
Centre for Health Management, 2011.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
The country-reported estimate is 15 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births, according to the
National Centre for Health Management, 2011.

The estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted
for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Twenty years after independence, the Republic of Moldova continues its
political and economic transition. The country has consistently voiced ambitions of
integrating into the European Union (EU), which are reflected in reforms under way
in education, health, social protection, human rights and justice, as well as in public
administration and decentralization. These reforms are expected to benefit children
insofar as they aim to increase service quality, civil society involvement in oversight
and service provision, transparency and citizens’ participation, and public financial
management. 1
2.
After the 2009 economic crisis, the economy grew by 7.5 per cent in 2010 and
poverty continues to fall, however over 40 per cent of rural households with three or
more children remain poor. While remittances contributed to 23 per cent of the gross
domestic product in 2010 2 and represent an important safety net, migration from the
Republic of Moldova, including from the Transnistrian region, has a direct impact
on children’s lives. The 2011 United Nations Moldova Country Analysis notes that
an estimated 40 per cent of the working-age population lives abroad, a situation that
__________________
1

2

2

Government of the Republic of Moldova, “Report on implementation of the Government
Activity Programme: European Integration: Freedom, Democracy, Welfare 2009-2013”,
September 2010.
World Bank, Migration and Remittances Factbook, 2010.

deprives children of parental guidance and support, and affects children ’s emotional
and psychological well-being. Crossing the border to find work or escape hardship
remains a tempting and potentially risky solution for vulnerable adolescents.
3.
Progress in the realization of child rights is in line with the 2009 Observations
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child as well as national Millennium
Development Goal targets. Achievements in the area of the right to survival include
a decline in the under-five mortality rate (U5MR) by 10 per cent between 2007 and
2011 3 (based on national data). Mother-to-child transmission of HIV decreased to
3 per cent by 2010. The health system of the Republic of Moldova, including in the
Transnistrian region, now provides integrated management of childhood illnesses 4
and improved neonatal care. Youth-friendly health centres (including in
Transnistrian region) serve over 50,000 adolescents and young people every year.
4.
Inequities, however, prevent these gains from reaching all children The 2011
UNICEF Situation Analysis identifies children particularly affected by disparity and
risk, with the largest groups being children in rural areas (who are three times more
likely to be poor than urban children) and in the Transnistrian region, as well as
children with disabilities and Roma children.
5.
In rural areas and the south, the U5MR is 33 to 50 per cent higher than the
national average. Rural and poor children and pregnant women, including Roma,
miss out on medical care due to long distances to health care providers, informal
payments and costs of treatments not covered by health insurance, 5 while 60 per
cent of children in rural schools face water and sanitation-associated health risks. 6
National HIV incidence, at 17.1 cases per 100,000 in 2010, is low; however,
adolescents and young people living in large cities and the Transnistrian region of
the Republic of Moldova are two or three times more at risk. 7 Prevention and care
are hampered by stigma and discrimination against children affected by HIV and
AIDS, and against marginalized adolescents (those with behaviours that put them at
risk).
6.
Children’s right to education is a priority in Moldova, which allocates over
20 per cent of public budget to this sector. Primary school gross enrolment
stabilized at 94 per cent after years of decline, and preschool enrolment has
increased from 70 to 77 per cent. The quality of education is improving and efforts
are being made to enrol children with disabilities and Roma children. Nevertheless
urban-rural disparities persist, due to the lack of qualified teachers and quality
infrastructure in villages. 8 Structural reforms under way, while needed to make more
efficient use of education resources given the population decline, may create risks
for already marginalized students unless the reforms are carefully monitored, and
the savings invested to improve quality. 9 Child labour and the inability of poor
__________________
3
4

5
6

7

8

9

www.childinfo.org.
UNICEF Moldova “Evaluation of Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses Initiative in
the Republic of Moldova for 2000-2010”, 2011.
UNICEF, Maternal and Child Health Equity Analysis, 2010.
Government of Moldova and UNICEF, Study on the Quality of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Practices in the Schools of Moldova, 2010.
National Centre for Preventive Medicine, Informative Bulletin on the HIV Infection Situation in
the Republic of Moldova, 2010.
National Bureau of Statistics, Statistical publication, “Education in Moldova”, 2011 .
http://www.statistica.md/pageview.php?l=ro&id=2819&idc=350, page 19.
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Vulnerable, Excluded and Discriminated Children in Moldova,

3

families to cover associated education costs likewise inhibit attainment of the
education Millennium Development Goal. 10 Children with disabilities are frequently
excluded or educated in auxiliary schools — practices still supported by the
majority of parents 11 — and Roma children sometimes face discrimination from
education professionals and other children.
7.
Progress towards realizing children’s right to protection includes the updating
of the adoption law in line with recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of
the Child, a 22 per cent decline in the use of institutional care for children in 2005 2010 and increased use of family-based care alternatives. 12 Nevertheless, young
children and children with disabilities are the last ones to benefit from
deinstitutionalization. There is greater awareness around domestic violence, and the
policy framework has improved. The number of children in detention has declined
dramatically and alternatives are increasingly available. There are social workers in
virtually every village.
8.
Over 45 per cent of households with children from the poorest quintile receive
no social payments; the problem is greatest for poor households with many children.
Bottlenecks include complex administrative requirements, discrimination, low
awareness and inherent limitations of targeting approaches. 13 Child labour is a
hidden but significant problem, particularly in rural areas: some 18 per cent of
children 5-17 years of age are affected, two thirds of them boys. 14 Qualitative
evidence suggests that some children are sent abroad to work. 15,16 There is growing
evidence of both boys and girls being victims of sexual abuse and exploitation, but
also greater societal recognition of the problem. 17 Substance abuse by adolescents,
especially boys, is an increasing concern. Corporal punishment is widely accepted.
9.
Meeting national goals and international and EU norms and standards, will
require increasing attention to social inclusion. In addition to syste mic bottlenecks
that prevent access to services by the most disadvantaged groups, social beliefs
inhibit the willingness and capacity of marginalized families to demand services and
the creation of a more inclusive social environment. Gender stereotypes co ntinue to
affect parenting roles, creating further challenges for effective caregiving, especially
in situations in which both mothers and fathers are absent due to labour migration.

__________________
10
11

12
13

14

15

16

17

4

2011.
Republic of Moldova, Second Millennium Development Goals Report, 2010.
UNICEF, National Survey on Early Childhood Care and Development: Family Knowledge,
Attitudes, and Practices, 2010.
National Bureau of Statistics, TransMONEE 2011 Statistical template.
UNICEF, “Impact of Cash Transfers on Poverty and Well-being of the Most Vulnerable Families
in the Republic of Moldova in the Context of Transfer from Category -based to Means-tested
Social Assistance”, 2011.
National Bureau of Statistics and International Labour Organization, “Working Children in the
Republic of Moldova: The Results of the 2009 Children’s Activities Survey”, 2010.
UNDP, UNICEF and UNIFEM, Report on Monitoring the crisis impact on local commu nities in
Moldova, March 2011.
UNICEF, “Impact of Cash Transfers on Poverty and Well-being of the Most Vulnerable Families
in the Republic of Moldova in the Context of Transfer from Category -based to Means-tested
Social Assistance”, 2011.
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Vulnerable, Excluded and Discriminated Children in Moldova,
2011.

Knowledge barriers are also an issue, with poor caregiving practices limi ting
children’s health and development outcomes. 18
10. Currently insufficient disaggregation, analysis and use of data reduce the
visibility of marginalized groups. At local level, lack of fiscal autonomy and unclear
roles and responsibilities also hamper implementation. 19 Central and local
authorities lack sufficient capacity and resources for the design and implementation
of services to allow appropriate coverage of those with greatest needs. The
capacities of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as service providers, policy
and budget decision-makers, and human rights advocates require strengthening, as
does the key oversight role of Parliament in child rights monitoring. Improvements
are also needed in media coverage of children and their rights. 20
11. Though their opinions are rarely taken into account, the right to participation
of children and adolescents is partly realized through the Child -Friendly Schools
initiative and youth-friendly health services. There is growing awareness of and
engagement in disaster risk management, a positive development, given the
possibility of increased risk due to climate change.
12. The Committee on the Rights of the Child 21 and several UNICEF-supported
studies 22 note insufficient coordination among the sectors with responsibility for
children. While the National Council for Child Rights Protection (NCCRP) has
improved inter-sectoral coordination and provides leadership at the policy level, the
lack of linkages among the health, social protection, education, police and just ice
systems at the national and local levels creates a critical bottleneck in the effort to
identify, refer and provide additional services and support to disadvantaged children
and their families.

__________________
18

19
20

21

22

UNICEF, National Survey on Early Childhood Care and Development: Family Knowledge,
Attitudes, and Practices, 2010.
United Nations, Moldova, Country Analysis, 2011.
UNICEF, National Survey on Early Childhood Care and Development: Family Knowledge,
Attitudes, and Practices, 2010.
Committee on the Rights of the Child, 50th session, Concluding Observations: Republic of
Moldova, 2009.
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Children Affected by HIV/AIDS in Moldova, 2008; UNICEF,
National Evaluation on Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission Programme, 2009;
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Excluded Children in Moldova, 2011; UNICEF, Assessment of
the Child Care System in Moldova, 2009; UNICEF, Maternal and Child Health Equity Analysis,
2010.

5

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2012
Key results achieved
13. The programme contributed to reducing the number of children in residential
institutions by 43 per cent 23 — surpassing the 30 per cent target. 24 Family support
services have been strengthened and preventive interventions and alternative care
services expanded. Legal and policy frameworks and regulations were established,
creating modern structures and enhancing existing ones to address the com plex
nature of child protection. 25 Reforms are expected to continue under the
Government’s anticipated Child and Family Protection Strategy.
14. The programme also contributed to the decrease in the number of children in
detention by 70 per cent, a figure surpassing the target of 50 per cent. 26 The legal
and normative framework is increasingly in line with international and European
(Council of Europe and European Union) standards. The justice system provides
alternative mechanisms and services such as probation, mediation and diversion. 27
15. In health, the country programme result on the reduction of U5MR has been
achieved. Health and social services are working together to identify, refer and
provide treatment to disadvantaged young children and to provide information to
their parents. Youth-friendly health services have been expanded and improved,
including some outreach for most-at-risk adolescents. 28 The services are part of, and
financed by, the health system. The 2011-2015 HIV/AIDS programme specifically
covers most-at-risk populations, including adolescents.
16. The country programme mobilized substantial funding from the Global
Partnership for Education and provided technical support for early childhood
development, contributing to a 10 per cent increase in preschool enrolment from
2005 to 2010. Following adoption of the Child-Friendly Schools approach, the
school curriculum was modernized, child-centred teaching methods were
introduced, and quality standards were developed, with positive results. 29 Inclusive
education is prominently featured in the national Education Strate gy. Roma
mediators, who facilitate better access of the Roma community to social services,
are expected to be introduced in localities with a large Roma community.
17. UNICEF supported the Government’s response to emergency situations. This
contributed to the following results: increased awareness of prevention of avian and
H1N1 flus 30 and strengthened health system capacity in emergency communication;
immunization of all children aged 13 to 18, stopping an outbreak of mumps;
mitigating the impact of food and economic crises in 2009 on 17,000 disadvantaged
__________________
23
24
25
26
27

28
29
30

6

UNICEF Moldova country office calculation based on TransMONEE 2011 statistical template.
When expressed as a rate, the gain is 22 per cent.
UNICEF, “Assessment of the Child Care System in Moldova”, 2009.
Administrative statistics of the Ministry of Justice, November 2011.
UNICEF, “Evaluation of Juvenile Justice Reform Project in Moldova”, preliminary results,
2011.
National Center for Reproductive Health. Methodological Center of YHFS Network, 2010.
UNICEF, Child-Friendly Schools Evaluation, preliminary results, 2011.
UNICEF Evaluation “Avian influenza: perception of informational campaign by population and
field specialists in Moldova”, 2009.

children; helping 2,234 disadvantaged child flood victims, including in the
Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova, to go back to school; and locally
modelling psycho-social support for families affected by natural disasters, to be
adopted nationwide.

Lessons learned
18. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) evaluation
recommended that continued attention be paid to governance reforms, human rights
strengthening, and effective advocacy in social protection, education and health,
while calling for more effective support for civil society involvement. Several
studies also show that further monitoring of resource distribution can help protect
existing gains for children and win new ones, and that careful balance among
means-tested social protection, allowances and service subsidies is needed to ensure
that children in extreme poverty are supported. 31, 32
19. Studies confirm the need for greater emphasis on social change to trans late
social policies into effective and sustainable actions that make a real impact on
children’s lives. 33 Discriminatory attitudes towards women, the poor, persons with
disabilities, and Roma influence the mind -set of policymakers, local authorities and
professionals working with children, and slow the development and implementation
of progressive policies to reach these groups. Social attitudes contribute in limiting
information and access to services for Roma families, create barriers to inclusion of
children with disabilities, promote the over-use of institutional care, curtail
adolescents’ access to appropriate services, and contribute to family violence and its
acceptance in the community. A 2011 gender assessment of the current country
programme noted that gender inequality and discrimination affect outcomes for boys
and girls, and that further gender mainstreaming should be pursued through social
change approaches in the new programme. 34

__________________
31

32

33

34

UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Vulnerable, Excluded and Discriminated Children in Moldova,
2011.
ECI & CBS-AXA, “Impact of cash transfers on poverty and well-being of the most vulnerable
families in the Republic of Moldova”, 2011.
UNICEF, Situation Analysis of Children Affected by HIV/AIDS in Moldova, 2008; UNICEF,
“Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices of Youth regarding HIV/AIDS in Moldova”, 2008;
UNICEF, Assessment of the Child Care System in Moldova, 2009; UNICEF, Maternal and Child
Health Equity Analysis, 2010; UNICEF, National Survey in Early Childhood Care and
Development: Family Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices, 2010; UNICEF, Situation Analysis of
Disadvantaged Children in Moldova, 2011.
UNICEF, Assessment of Gender Mainstreaming in the UNICEF-Moldova Country Programme
2007-2012 and Recommendations for the Next Country Programme, 2011.

7

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Social inclusion and protection of children

2 000

15 000

17 000

Governance and social change for child rights

1 000

4 500

5 500

750

800

1 550

3 750

20 300

24 050

Cross-sectoral
Total

Preparation process
20. This programme was developed in conjunction with the United NationsRepublic of Moldova Partnership Framework 2013-2017, based on an evaluation of
the current UNDAF 35 and Country Analysis, 36 followed by a Strategic Prioritization
workshop with the Government in September 2011. Its preparation was informed by
a Situation Analysis focusing on disadvantaged and excluded children and
evaluations undertaken since the midterm review. A human rights-based analysis
identified underlying determinants of the major issues affecting children, as part of a
consultative process with the Government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and Parliament. The programme design was validated with the NCCRP, cha ired by
the Deputy Prime Minister for Social Issues, with the participation of line
Ministries, Ministry of Finance, Ombudsman’s Office for Child Rights, NGOs and
United Nations entities.
21. The following formed the basis of this programme: the Concluding
Observations of the Committees on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (2006), on the Rights of the Child (2009), on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (2011) and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2011), and the
2011 recommendations of the Universal Periodic Review, especially regarding
violence, gender, non-discrimination and disadvantaged groups, and the need for
greater attention to be paid to the implementation, with adequate financial support,
of laws and normative documents.

Programme components, results and strategies
22. The country programme supports government and civil society to bring about
greater social inclusion of children and their families who are at risk of exclusion
due to geographic disparities, poverty, ethnicity, disability, gender, and lack of or
__________________
35

36

8

Evaluation Report — United Nations Development Assistance Framework, Moldova, 2011.
http://www.un.md/un_res_coord_sys/docs/UNDAF%20Evaluation%20Report%20 %20Moldova.pdf.
United Nations Moldova, Country Analysis, 2011. http://www.un.md/un_res_coord_sys/docs/
Country%20Analysis%20-%20UN%20Moldova_ENG.pdf.

poor parental care. It incorporates wider international, European targets and
benchmarks, in line with national aspirations.
23. The key results of the programme by end-2017 are: (a) the Government
addresses disparities in access to quality education, health, protection and justice
services for disadvantaged children and families; and (b) governance structures and
social attitudes are more child-sensitive and equity-oriented.
24. Capacity-building, partnership and evidence-based advocacy will support
greater focus on disparity reduction, both between urban and rural areas and
between the general population and specific disadvantaged groups, thus
strengthening ongoing reforms as well as creating an enabling environm ent for
increasing child participation. The programme will apply a gender lens to all
programming, focusing more intently on the role of men in children ’s lives,
empowering women, and addressing the barriers undermining girls ’ and boys’
realization of their rights. Attention to disaster risk reduction and emergency
preparedness will also be mainstreamed.

Programme components
25. The two main programme components are (a) social inclusion and protection
of children; and (b) governance and social change for child rights. Close
interaction between these components is envisaged to document good practices,
address local-level capacity gaps, support policy reforms and improved resource
allocations, and counter negative social attitudes.
26. Social inclusion and protection of children. This programme component
prioritizes access to quality services, protection mechanisms, and cash benefits for
children from groups who are not fully covered by ongoing public sector reforms,
including children living in rural areas and the Transnistrian region of the Republic
of Moldova, or affected by poverty and migration. The violation of the rights of
Roma children and children with disabilities will be addressed throughout this
component. Special attention will be given to providing new opportunities for
inclusion and a “second chance” to adolescents whose lives have been disrupted by
violence, school dropout, conflict with the law, institutionalization, poverty,
discrimination, migration, trafficking, HIV/AIDS and substance a buse. Key partners
will be the Ministries of Education; Labour, Social Protection and Family; Health;
Internal Affairs; and Justice, and local authorities.
27. The programme will contribute to (a) increased access to quality education,
with greater increases among disadvantaged groups including children with
disabilities; (b) improved care and development of young children, especially
disadvantaged ones; (c) stopping the rising trend of HIV/AIDS incidence among
those 15-19 years old; (d) increased access by children deprived of a family
environment to family-based care; and (e) increased access to social benefits and
quality social and justice services for disadvantaged children and their families.
28. Technical cooperation and international knowledge-sharing will support
revision of normative and regulatory frameworks in health, education, child
protection, social protection and justice, in line with international, EU and Council
of Europe child rights treaties and standards. These approaches, together with
capacity development and resource-leveraging, will be used to develop further the

9

national and local capacities to deliver quality services and improve outreach and
coverage of disadvantaged children, and will incorporate the testing and expansion
of successful implementation models. This will include support to the social sectors
to plan and mitigate the risk of possible future natural disasters and economic
downturns, especially at the local level. This component will strengthen inter sectoral collaboration and strengthen timely identification and referral of
disadvantaged children to a continuum of community-based services.
Communication for development will address care practices and create a more
protective environment for children in families and commu nities, particularly the
most disadvantaged. Local research and knowledge generation will support policy
advocacy.
29. Under the anticipated Child and Family Protection Strategy, the programme
will build capacities for prevention and response so that child ren at risk or victims
of abuse, violence, neglect and exploitation receive child -friendly support from
caregivers, professionals, social services and the justice system. Sexual abuse and
exploitation and child labour will be addressed by increasing awaren ess, reporting
and referral. Gains in child care system reform will be extended to children with
disabilities, and those below three years, by preventing separation through increased
availability of support services and family-based alternative care. Coordinated work
with police, justice, local authorities, social actors and NGOs will support
appropriate responses and services for children in contact with the law, including
victims and witnesses. Local modelling of innovative justice and social services wil l
also support national policy development. The programme will promote integration
of social services and cash assistance to help to address barriers to access so that
disadvantaged families receive the support needed to raise their children within a
family environment and the challenges created by the absence of parents and other
adults due to migration are better addressed.
30. The programme will support education reform efforts to improve universal
access to, quality and governance of education, guided b y the Strategic framework
for education and training of the European Union. The programme will particularly
focus on inclusive education, combating discrimination, reaching and supporting
Roma children, children with disabilities and out-of-school children. To reduce
urban-rural disparities, the programme will support strengthening of monitoring
systems at local and national levels so that information on quality, achievement,
attendance and dropout of disadvantaged groups is available for better decision making. Work on improving the quality of education through standards and
capacity-building will continue. As part of the national commitment to child friendly schools, the programme will seek to reduce violence and increase child and
community participation in school governance. UNICEF will leverage support for
improving water and sanitation facilities in rural areas, and promote hygiene, human
rights, disaster management and environmental education.
31. In line with the EU Communication on Early Childhood Ed ucation and Care
and EU National Roma Integration Framework, and as part of the focus of the
national development strategy “Moldova 2020” on human capital development, the
country programme will aim to improve nutrition, health, early stimulation practices
at home, and school-readiness through increased access to, and utilization and
quality of, inclusive early learning facilities, focusing on rural children, children in
the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova, children with disabilities and
Roma children. Health policies and systems aiming at improving coverage for

10

disadvantaged families will be reinforced. Peri- and post-natal care services will be
supported to improve quality and outreach to disadvantaged families as well as
ongoing support to parents to provide adequate care. The programme will support
cross-sectoral commitments to early detection and intervention and community based services for children with disabilities.
32. Given the high risk of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, as well
as substance abuse and teenage pregnancies, the component will support increased
attention to disadvantaged adolescents, urban and rural children, and the needs of
boys and girls, which will be addressed through gender -sensitive strategies. In
addition, the programme will work towards changing social norms involving
discrimination against adolescents engaging in risky behaviours, and enhancing
adolescents’ knowledge, attitudes and practices. This work will be directly related to
national HIV/AIDS, health, education, and youth policies and strategies. The
programme will increasingly build the skills and capacities of adolescent girls and
boys to protect their rights through initiatives that reach and empower them to
participate actively in all matters affecting their lives.
33. Governance and social change for child rights. This component will help
governance structures, services and social attitudes to become more child -sensitive
and equity-oriented. It will do this by (a) supporting the efforts of central and local
authorities to make planning, policy monitoring, costing and budgeting of key child related laws and programmes more responsive to the needs of disadvantaged
children; and (b) realizing clear progress against outstanding observations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child pertaining to (i) the collection of
disaggregated, equity-informative data and its use for policy formulation and
evaluation; (ii) the participation of civil society and the media in the protection and
promotion of children’s rights; (iii) the allocation of resources for the
implementation of legislation and strategies that impact children; and (iv) the
independent and effective monitoring of the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. The component will help governance structures and civil
society to create a public dialogue and trigger social change leading to more
inclusive social practices towards disadvantaged children and families, while further
empowering these groups to claim their rights. Key counterparts will include the
State Chancellery; the Ministries of Finance, Education, Health, and Labour, Social
Protection and Family; Parliament; Child Rights Parliament Advocate; and local
public authorities.
34. The programme will support giving increased attention to children in
budgetary frameworks and local results-based budgeting, and help to improve
efficiencies in public expenditures to allow for greater investment in disadvantaged
children. It will clarify responsibilities among different levels of administration to
identify unfunded mandates for social sectors regarding children and to improve
appreciation of the opportunities and risks involved in decentralizing key services
for children. As decentralization progresses, the programme wil l strengthen
capacities of local authorities to plan, budget, and provide appropriate services with
attention to equity concerns, demographic and social changes due to migration and
disaster risk. The capacity of local government and NGOs will be enhanced to
engage and empower communities, including children themselves, through effective
public communication.

11

35. The programme will assist national and local partners to collect and
disseminate disaggregated data in line with international and European standa rds,
and use evidence more effectively for policy development, programming and
budgeting, including for disadvantaged and at-risk populations. Part of this work
will be done through continuation of a United Nations Joint Programme on
Statistics.
36. The programme will continue to work with the media to increase their
awareness of and capacity to report ethically on child rights, and to promote social
change. Adolescent participation will be strengthened through support to national
and local participation mechanisms for children and youth, including building
bridges across regions. Institutions with responsibility for child rights legislation
development, monitoring and oversight will be supported through this component,
including the NCCRP, Parliament, the Child Rights’ Advocate and the Ministry of
Labour, Social Protection and Family, to monitor progress on the Concluding
Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the child rights
chapter of the EU-Republic of Moldova Association Agreement. The capacity of
NGOs to advocate, provide inputs to, monitor and report on policies and budgets
will be strengthened to foster civil society participation in public debate. Through
increased engagement with the corporate sector, the programme will work to initiate
public-private partnerships and influence corporate social responsibility efforts to
support appropriate services for and greater outreach to disadvantaged children and
families.
37. The country programme will strengthen the knowledge, attitudes and practices
of children themselves, as well as caregivers, professionals in contact with children,
and communities, and will promote national debate on acceptable social norms
regarding children. This two-pronged approach will contribute to empowering
disadvantaged children — including adolescent boys and girls ‒ and their families to
claim their rights. This will be accomplished by increasing their knowledge of their
rights and their skills in claiming them and by supporting a conducive environment
at national and local levels. Social change approaches will help to provide an
enabling environment by changing norms and mindsets and strengthening social
dialogue around four broad issues: discrimination against Roma, children with
disabilities, other disadvantaged children and adolescents; gender -based violence
against children and women; separation of children from families; and child labour.
Positive social change will be further fostered through communication for
development, policy and legal changes and capacity-building of civil society and
state systems.
38. Cross-sectoral. The component will support effective operations, country
office management and administration, cross-sectoral and United Nations system
activities, including monitoring and evaluation, as well as midterm reviews and
programme documentation.

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
39. The country programme supports key national priorities concerning education
and justice outlined in “Moldova 2020” as well as the implementation of the child
rights chapter of the draft EU-Republic of Moldova Association Agreement, and the
national Human Rights Action Plan. The country programme contributes to sector

12

strategies in education, justice, and health as well as cross -cutting national strategies
and programmes on inclusive education, HIV/AIDS, youth-friendly health services,
micronutrient deficiencies, and the anticipated Education Code and Child and
Family Protection Strategy.
40. The new country programme derives directly from the United Nations Republic of Moldova Partnership Framework 2013-2017 (UNPF), and will
contribute explicitly to the achievement of outcomes under all three pillars: (a)
democratic governance, justice, and equality and human rights; (b) human
development and social inclusion; and (c) environment, climate change and disaster
risk management.

Relationship to international priorities
41. The programme seeks to address many child rights-related recommendations
made during the first Universal Periodic Review of the Republic of Moldova in
2011, including tackling domestic violence against children; ensuring education
access for children with disabilities; ending child labour; preventing trafficking and
sexual exploitation of children; fully implementing the reform of the residential care
system for children, and ensuring support for the Child Rights Advocate. These
recommendations echo previous observations of the Committees on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and on the Rights of the Child, who also emphasized the
importance of improving data collection on disadvantaged groups as well as greater
attention to discrimination, including discrimination against the Roma population.

Major partnerships
42. Direct partnerships with central and selected local public authorities will drive
overall progress towards cooperation objectives. These will be further supported
through strategic partnership with the NCCRP, which oversees progress towards
international child rights commitments and related action plans of the Republic of
Moldova. The NCCRP will make a significant contribution towards achieving the
expected country programme goals through its convening and coordination of key
Ministries and NGOs. The Child Rights Advocate will be another essential partner
in child rights monitoring and advocacy.
43. The programme will collaborate with the EU delegation, focusing on
implementation of the child rights chapter of the EU -Republic of Moldova
Association Agreement, as well as common advocacy and resource -leveraging to
support social inclusion goals, including in the Transnistrian region of the Republic
of Moldova. Common advocacy and programming opportunities will be pursued
with the Council of Europe around justice, Roma inclusion and violence prevention.
Continued collaboration with the World Bank in programme developmen t, technical
advice and analytical work will be relied on to bring about greater sensitivity
towards children regarding support for the social protection reform and further
attention to disadvantaged groups in education.
44. Collaboration will continue with key bilateral partners and with the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Global Partnership for
Education, the Moldova Social Investment Fund and local and international NGOs.

13

14

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The programme will monitor progress towards the realization of child rights
and support the evaluation of key national policies and programmes related to
children, such as inclusive education, de-institutionalization, the components of
HIV/AIDS and justice related to children. It will widely share results with partners
to improve new policy. UNICEF and the Government will evaluate key programme
interventions such as communication for development, the child -friendly school
initiative, early childhood development, child care reform, and youth-friendly health
services.
46. Baselines will be calculated using the 2012 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
and the 2014 Population Census results. Additional research will be undertaken as
needed to provide more in-depth analysis on key issues such as those related to
Roma children, dropout and absenteeism, substance abuse by adolescents, and
sexual exploitation and abuse of children. The Situation Analysis, focusing on
disadvantaged children, will be regularly updated. The coordinating partner will be
the State Chancellery.

15

