Mongolia
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Mongolia
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.6) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data†
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.9

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

29

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2009)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female)

5
5/6,7/3
81 a
96/98 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

95

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

76

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

50

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

<0.1

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2005)

18

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2005)

98

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

99/98, 98/99, 99/98

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
GNI per capita (US$)

1630

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

95

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

94

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
65 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
b
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
In the 20 years since the nation’s transition from socialism to a liberal market
economy, Mongolia has become one the region’s most consistent economic
performers and has undertaken a host of democratic reforms. This sparsely
populated country is also experiencing a period of rapid urbanizatio n. While
semi-nomadic ways of life still predominate in rural areas, more than half of the
country’s 2.7 million people now live in urban centres, particularly in the capital,
Ulaanbaatar.
2.
Largely buoyed by investment in the mining sector, the annual gr owth rate of
gross domestic product (GDP) has doubled since 2000. The projected future
dominance of the mining sector places Mongolia among those resource -rich
countries whose economies depend on resource extraction, which makes them
highly vulnerable to external financial shocks and volatile world commodity prices.
Indeed, the sharp fall in GDP — from 8.9 per cent in 2008 to 1.6 per cent in 2009 —
during the global financial downturn clearly demonstrated the vulnerability of
Mongolia. It also highlighted the risks inherent in using mining revenue to support
the welfare sector and underlined the lack of mechanisms available for targeting the
poor. The country faces an inflation rate above 20 per cent and soaring food prices,

2

and this next period will establish whether or not Mongolia can transform its wealth
into assets for sustainable broad-based development.
3.
Human development indicators confirm that a significant percentage of the
population remains largely untouched by the nation’s economic growth, which to
date has disproportionately benefited the wealthiest segment. The poverty rate has
remained stagnant at 35 per cent nationally and 50 per cent in rural and peri -urban
areas. Seventy-three per cent of the poor work in low-paying jobs in urban centres
or in rural herding and farming households. Nationwide, 42 per cent of children live
in poverty and 21 per cent suffer from chronic malnutrition.
4.
Inequity in Mongolia is rooted in a complex mix of political, social and
economic factors, including discrimination targeting women, ethno-linguistic
minorities and people with disabilities. It encompasses structural poverty,
geographic isolation, weak governance and dominant cultural and social norms.
Inequities persist across all areas and are comparatively hi gher in poor urban areas.
The country’s Gini coefficient of 0.36 represents one of the highest rates of
inequality among post-transition countries. Attempts to streamline the social welfare
system have failed to generate more intensive or consistent suppor t for the nation’s
poor and disadvantaged. If left unchecked, these issues could undermine the
progress Mongolia has made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
5.
The Committees on the Rights of the Child and on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women have highlighted significant inequities in access to
and quality of social services by women, ethnic minorities and people with
disabilities. Internal migration, largely driven by the search for employment and
greater access to social services, has placed a substantial burden on already
overstretched services. It has also highlighted concerns related to child labour,
gender-based violence and child abuse and neglect, as well as the lack of family
support mechanisms, an organized child protection system and a continuum of care
for victims.
6.
Confirming the impact of the country’s disparities, a 2009 study found that one
third of children from the lowest wealth quintile suffered from malnutrition and
other micronutrient deficiencies such as rickets; one third were deprived of health
and shelter; and half did not have access to education. Although strong gains have
been made in the number of children accessing early childhood education, the
Government has recognized that its quality and relevance are major challenges.
7.
More than 50 per cent of the rural population has no access to safe water and
nearly 70 per cent has no access to adequate sanitation. Lack of water and sanitation
in rural schools and dormitories, where children spend up to nine months of the
year, remains a critical area of concern.
8.
While good progress has been made in reducing the maternal mortality ratio
and child mortality rates, indicators are generally worse for rural and ethnic
populations. In 2009, the maternal mortality ratio ranged from 23 deaths per
100,000 live births in Ulaanbaatar to 165 per 100,000 in one of the rural provinces.
More than 75 per cent of these deaths were recorded among herdswomen, the
unemployed and unregistered migrants. In terms of HIV/AI DS, an alarming increase
of 92 per cent in the number of registered HIV and AIDS cases in the past five years
is drawing attention to this currently neglected area.

3

9.
Corruption and poor governance are undermining development and fuelling
concerns about national insecurity, as disenfranchised segments of the population
are increasingly left behind in the nation’s economic development. Women remain
politically disempowered. Their ability to affect policy change has been hindered by
their exclusion from political participation.
10. Mongolia also faces challenges related to its geography, harsh climate and lack
of national road infrastructure, which make logistical planning and implementation
costlier and more problematic than in many countries. Climate chang e has also
engendered such challenges as increasingly extreme temperatures in summer and
winter, water shortages, poor water quality, land degradation and desertification,
which directly threaten livelihoods and national food security.
11. In 2010, Mongolia was hit by a devastating dzud (heavy snowfall and extreme
cold), which prevented livestock from grazing. It adversely affected 30 per cent of
the population, including 300,000 children, and resulted in the loss of 22 per cent of
the nation’s livestock. It also increased the exodus of people from impoverished
rural areas to peri-urban centres and exposed chronic weaknesses in the country’s
ability to respond to humanitarian and environmental crises. This highlighted the
need for ongoing support to the Government, particularly in improving coordination
for emergency preparedness and response and mobilization of resources.
12. As Mongolia continues its rapid progress towards middle-income status, the
challenge is to ensure that economic growth contributes to poverty alleviation and
offsets widespread socio-economic disparities.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
13. The 2007-2011 country programme of cooperation contributed to defining
national goals in the country’s Millennium Development Goals-based National
Development Strategy. It focused on the priority areas of integrated child survival,
early childhood development, basic education, child protection and emergency
preparedness and response. In partnership with the Government of Mongolia, other
United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), UNICEF
achieved the following key results.
14. The establishment of 97 ger-kindergartens (mobile preschools) in remote areas
and support for activities of visiting teachers, combined with legislation
encouraging service provision and quality improvements, contributed to a 46 per
cent increase in preschool net enrolment nationally. In addition, 3,000 most disadvantaged children were enrolled in preschools, and the Government endorsed
the inclusive child-friendly schools initiative.
15. From 2005 to 2009, the under-five mortality rate dropped from 51 to 29 deaths
per 1,000 live births. The Reach Every District (RED) strategy was piloted in five
districts of Ulaanbaatar. This intervention, which provides essential health services
to marginalized children and women in isolated areas, effectively addressed
inequities in provision of health services as determined in a 2010 evaluation.
Implementation of the strategy also resulted in a three-fold budget increase for

4

vaccines in 2009. The Ministry of Health will progressively scale up the strategy in
2011.
16. The Government made significant progress in establishing a juvenile justice
system and amended the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedures Law in line with
international standards. UNICEF helped design a community-based juvenile justice
diversion programme that was implemented at three pilot sites. It provided access to
alternative legal mechanisms for 1,400 children and their families, and preventive
actions were undertaken for more than 4,000 disadvantaged children. Authorities in
nine districts have now established community-based diversion programmes and
have committed funds, human resources and facilities to ensure sustainability.
17. The Government’s Household Development Plan, a national strategy targeting
poor families, included two major UNICEF-supported initiatives: the Family
Empowerment Strategy and the Child-Friendly Communities Initiative. The Family
Empowerment Strategy training package was subsequently revised to include new
indicators covering family income, employment, hand -washing, prevention of
HIV/sexually transmitted infections and environmental protection.
18. In 2010, the Government led a Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and the
fourth national nutrition survey. UNICEF promoted development of institutional
capacity in survey management, data analysis and report writing. The dissemination
of results in 2011 will inform future decision-making, with a particular focus on
equity to help to accelerate full realization of the Millennium Development Goals.
19. The 300,000 children affected by the 2010 dzud benefited from the health,
nutrition, psychosocial and education support provided by UNICEF. Emergency
preparedness was reinforced through establishment of a cluster-based emergency
response system. UNICEF leads four key clusters: nutrition, water, sanitation and
hygiene, and logistics and telecommunications, and co -leads the education cluster.
Lessons learned
20. A number of reviews indicate that a range of policies and legal frameworks
were successfully developed, but adequate resources were not available for their
implementation. In addition to the policy framework, UNICEF needs to better
employ tools for strategic communication and social budgeting. This will ensure a
more focused approach to the management and structuring of public finances and
more equitable distribution to excluded populations.
21. Because of the country’s relatively small child population, the country
programme receives only minimal regular resources funding. This meant that efforts
to address challenges across many locations saw the budget spread thin and some
results diluted. However, investment in a limited number of on-the-ground projects
was vindicated as strong model projects were brought to scale by the Government,
generating evidence for policy development.
22. Flooding and dzud emergencies highlighted critical gaps in capacity. As a
result, programming by both the Government and the United Nations programmes
fluctuated between regular programming and emergency response. This experience
demonstrates the need for focus on the impacts of climate change and better
integration of disaster risk reduction and emergency preparedness and response into
strategies and workplans.

5

23. The need to focus on equitable access to health care was confirmed in a joint
study by the Government, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and the World Health Organization on emergency obstetric and essential newborn
care. The study highlighted the value of the RED strategy and the importance of
analysing gaps and bottlenecks and the costs required to address them for effective
promotion of equity in maternal and child health services.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table*
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programme

Social policy, investment and advocacy for children’s rights
Integrated and inclusive interventions for children
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

965

2 453

3 418

2 310

12 427

14 737

475

370

845

3 750

15 250

19 000

* Additional funds for emergency response may be raised if necessary.

Preparation process
24. In 2010, the Common Country Assessment (CCA) undertaken in conjunction
with the Government established consensus on the priority areas to be included in
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2012 -2016. The
draft CPD covers the contribution of UNICEF to the UNDAF and responds to the
most recent concluding observations of human rights treaty bodies.
25. The CCA, UNDAF and CPD processes were highly consultative and inclusive.
Strategic planning sessions were conducted for the first time with internatio nal
financial institutions and bilateral partners. Joint UNFPA/UNICEF consultations
reinforced with the Government and NGOs the strong collaboration and shared
vision of these organizations on key areas of Millennium Development Goal
achievement. A joint consultation of vice-ministers, UNICEF, UNFPA and the
United Nations Development Programme on the CPDs of the three organizations
resulted in a comprehensive understanding by the Government of the focus, synergy
and results to be achieved. It also helped to ensure that country programme
components were strategic and complemented other initiatives planned by the
Government and partners.

Goals, key results and strategies
Goals
26. The overall goal of this country programme is to support Mongolia in
addressing inequity in accordance with the National Development Strategy, UNDAF
and Millennium Development Goals. The programme has two key priority areas.

6

27. The first employs social-budgeting initiatives and support for the creation of
pro-poor social and investment policies. It will support the Government in
introducing essential mechanisms for data management, disparity analysis, social
protection, policy review, coordination and advocacy on child rights, and equitable
social investments.
28. The second priority area defines clear targets to address the multiple
deprivations suffered by children and monitors the impact and results of a limited
number of equity-focused programmes and policy strategies. In this regard,
UNICEF will support high-impact interventions in selected disadvantaged
communities. It will introduce child-friendly, integrated interventions while also
making provision for appropriate and timely responses to humanitarian needs.
Special emphasis will be placed on water and sanitation appro aches that are
community-driven and utilize energy-efficient technologies. These interventions
will provide evidence for policy initiatives and will validate scaling up by the
Government.
Key results
29. The programme will advance the rights of children, women and poor families
through targeted and integrated interventions that support policies and better public
finance approaches and address inequities in achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals for children. It will work with the Government to achieve the
following results:
(a) Government policies and mechanisms are established that address the
governance, accountability, policy and legislative issues that reinforce patterns of
deprivation, and are reflected in equitable budget allocations an d the provision of a
continuum of services for child protection;
(b) The Government collects and analyses disaggregated data using DevInfo
and other tools, and conducts evaluations to improve the effectiveness of actions
targeting children and women;
(c) Institutions, systems and structures better integrate disaster risk reduction
in development programmes, enhance gender mainstreaming and prepare for and
respond to emergencies in line with the Core Commitments for Children in
Humanitarian Action;
(d) The private sector, donors, individuals, the media and civil society
organizations engage in dialogue on child rights issues, support for South -South
cooperation and long-term strategic partnerships to leverage resources and action for
children;
(e) In selected pilot areas, local governments engage in planning and budget
reviews that promote achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
provide evidence for national scaling up of integrated, child -friendly, healthy
approaches in communities and schools that:
(i) Improve by 50 per cent the utilization of quality basic social services by
households and individuals;
(ii) Integrate ethno-linguistic minorities, migrant children and children with
disabilities into quality basic education;

7

(iii) Reach 50 per cent of children aged 10-14 years with comprehensive
knowledge on life skills and HIV prevention;
(iv) Engage adolescents in community development for social change, civic
participation, environmental sustainability and awareness of climate change;
(v) Model child protection and support systems and empower parents and
children with knowledge on prevention of violence;
(vi) Ensure that at least 75 per cent of disadvantaged children and women
benefit from high-impact preventive health and nutrition interventions in a
minimum of 15 remote provinces;
(vii) Ensure that primary school children have access to energy-efficient water
and sanitation facilities and practise good hygiene, and that all health centres
have functioning water and sanitation facilities.
Strategies
30. The main shift of this country programme compared with the previous one is
to provide stronger technical assistance to the Government to establish appropriate
mechanisms and promote effective policy implementation and budget allocati ons
that are sensitive to human rights, gender and social inclusion. As such, UNICEF
interventions will be directed at national, subnational and community levels.
31. At the national level the programme will encourage the establishment of
mechanisms for data and disparity analysis, policy review and effective
implementation with appropriate budget allocations. Strategic communications and
evaluations will be aimed at positioning children and women, particularly those
most vulnerable, at the heart of the country’s development agenda.
32. At the subnational level the programme will support reinforcement of
partnerships with selected local governments to address capacity gaps in local
planning, delivery and monitoring of quality services for children to ensur e better
tailoring to each district’s needs.
33. At the community level the programme will support empowerment of service
providers and beneficiaries through support for behaviour change and demand driven provision of quality services. This will involve increasing the emphasis on
Communication for Development.
34. To generate evidence and provide a foundation for effective advocacy and
policy review, throughout the cycle the country programme will maintain a focus on
social inclusion, human rights, gender equality, awareness of climate change, and
emergency preparedness and response. It will also emphasize child and adolescent
participation in implementing interventions, primarily in one peri -urban area and
one rural area. These will be selected using the following criteria: (a) a composite
index indicating multiple deprivations and a study of the drivers of inequity in those
locations; (b) locations at which UNICEF can add most value and be operationally
efficient; and (c) districts that the Government has assessed to be the most
disadvantaged.

8

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
35. The programme of cooperation is aligned with the priorities of the country ’s
National Development Strategy (2007-2021). The programme introduces the shifts
in focus that will help generate evidence for policy review and increase strategic
investments for children.
36. The country programme outcomes contribute to all four pillars of the UNDAF,
2012-2016, with a particular focus on ensuring access to and use of q uality basic
social services, particularly for those most disadvantaged. Other outcomes are:
(a) ensuring economic development is inclusive and equitable; (b) improving the
sustainability of natural resource management and the resilience of ecosystems and
vulnerable populations to climate change; and (c) strengthening governance for
protection of human rights and a reduction in disparities.
Relationship to international priorities
37. The country programme is designed to accelerate equitable achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015. Its development was guided by human
rights treaties, the medium-term strategic plan and the agenda of A World Fit for
Children, as well as the Millennium Development Goals and Millennium
Declaration and other internationally agreed goals. It has been reviewed against the
development plans of key bilateral and multilateral partners. The results will
contribute to all focus areas as elaborated in the revised UNICEF medium-term
strategic plan, 2006-2013.
Programme components
38. Building on the achievements of the past, the new country programme will
strengthen work upstream and be backed by evidence generated through integrated
interventions on the ground under two programme components.
Programme component 1: Social policy, investment and advocacy for
children’s rights
39. This component aims to help ensure that children are given due importance
under national priorities and benefit from commensurate allocation of financial
resources. It will support the development of strong child-friendly policy briefs,
including economic impact analysis, costing studies and annual updates on the
situation of children in Mongolia. Based on evidence generated through pilot
projects, it will also support the development of ne w child-friendly laws and
policies and will ensure the availability of disaggregated data. This programme
component covers the three areas described below.
40. Social policy and budget will promote the use of data to inform social policy
dialogue and influence decisions and the introduction of key mechanisms at national
and subnational levels on: (a) children’s and women’s rights; (b) social protection
and the inclusion of marginalized groups; and (c) strengthening capacity at national
and subnational levels for the design and implementation of social protection
programmes. It will address the impact of social protection and social -sector
spending on outcomes for children and child poverty. It aims to provide options that
enable social sectors and public finance reforms to be more sensitive to children,
ensure that national legislation conforms with the principles of the Convention on

9

the Rights of the Child principles and that budgetary allocations adequately target
vulnerable children. It is also focused on building capacity to improve analysis of
public spending and its impact on social and gender equity through greater
engagement in public financial management at national and local levels.
41. Monitoring and evaluation capacity will be strengthened to hel p to ensure that
the Government collects, analyses and uses disaggregated data to improve the
efficiency, effectiveness, quality and equity of development for children and
women. Special attention will be paid to managing and disseminating knowledge,
including evaluation and documentation of experiences for scaling up and policy
development. Research will also be carried out to generate evidence in areas not
specifically addressed under the programme components. It will also ensure that
progress in monitoring and reporting is aligned with key priorities. During the cycle,
UNICEF will primarily support cost analyses of its core interventions, the Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey and evaluation of key interventions.
42. Advocacy and communication will build long-term partnerships with the
private sector, the media, civil society groups and prominent individuals. The aim is
to create an alliance for children across Mongolian society and to strengthen the
sustainability of social inclusion initiatives. This will help share knowledge to assist
with mobilization of resources for sustained investments aimed at improving the
situation of excluded and disadvantaged children and to strengthen political
commitment. Such efforts will be particularly important if an econo mic downturn
constrains government resources. Strengthened partnerships will also lead to better
advocacy, information management and budgetary adjustments, which will ensure
the protection of children during difficult economic periods and emergencies or
natural disasters. The programme will also support the Government in emergency
preparedness and response coordination through the National Emergency
Management Agency.
Programme component 2: Integrated and inclusive interventions for children
43. This component will address groups of children most affected by disparities,
reaching them with cost-effective, integrated services. The services are designed to
reinforce policy initiatives undertaken at the national level, providing evidence of
their effectiveness and thus persuading the Government to bring them up to scale.
Interventions in two geographic areas will focus on reaching pregnant women and
children from birth to 5 years in communities. It will use schools to introduce
integrated approaches to providing quality child-friendly education for children
aged 6-18 years. This component covers three areas of intervention, described
below.
44. Young children’s survival and development. This will promote the use of
high-impact, low-cost health interventions; reinforce food fortification and nutrition
policy initiatives; strengthen birth and migration registration to improve access to
services; build parenting skills; and promote quality early childhood development
opportunities to reinforce policies that enha nce the quality of such services. The
RED strategy and the FES will be strengthened and scaled up according to
government planning, supported by UNICEF and building on the UNFPA -supported
Telemedicine project.
45. Quality and rights-respecting schools. This will promote models of inclusive
quality education in safe school environments for children aged 6 -18 years. This

10

component will ensure that ‘unreached’ children — such as children with
disabilities, children from ethnic minorities and boys in monasteries — receive
schooling. It will operate by reinforcing the policy focus on education quality,
including support for establishment of national and school -level systems to assess
child-friendly schools and student learning achievements. All dimensions of chil dfriendly schools will be promoted: inclusiveness; relevance; a healthy, safe and
protective environment; and the involvement of students, families and communities.
46. Underpinned by a strong legislative framework, local pilot projects will
provide evidence for child protection services in schools where the policy is
currently under development. The component will also support efforts to develop a
comprehensive national child protection system, by introducing early -detection
mechanisms, building children’s awareness and skills, and promoting cross-sectoral
mechanisms to respond to abuse and neglect by engaging the health, education,
social welfare and justice sectors.
47. This approach will also promote children’s participation in areas including
civic knowledge, life skills, health promotion and community development for
social change. With a focus on children in the 10-14 age group, the approach will
promote their access to information, the services essential for their health (including
HIV prevention), education, development and participation. These services will be
offered in adolescent-friendly spaces in peri-urban areas and through after-school
programmes, modelling the most effective approaches for and in conjunction with
vulnerable adolescents.
48. Water, environment and sanitation. Water and sanitation is crucial to
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, so this will be a key area of
focus through child-friendly schools and community approaches. Energy-efficient
sanitation facilities and the use of solar power for schools and health facilities in
rural Mongolia will be piloted in selected areas. These activities will reinforce
efforts to enhance sector capacity to provide quality services; improve coordination,
planning and management; and introduce innovative ‘green’ technologies and
methodologies. Demonstrations of good practices will be undertaken in selected
vulnerable communities in tandem with other partners working to develop
infrastructure and services in health care facilities. This effort will provide evidence
for policy development, knowledge generation, advocacy and provision of
resources. At the grass-roots level, awareness will be raised, leading to capacity
development among individuals, families and communities.
49. This component will also mainstream emergency preparedness and disaster
risk management.
50. Cross-sectoral costs encompass programme support and operational functions
to ensure effective and efficient implementation of the country programme. They
also cover supply and logistics, communications and programme management.
Major partnerships
51. Under the leadership of the Government of Mongolia, partnerships will
include: (a) United Nations agencies guided by the UNDAF, 2012 -2016; (b) the
World Bank, Asian Development Bank and bilateral and other multilateral partners;
(c) international and national NGOs and civil society organizations, human rights
groups and youth associations; (d) regional and subregional bodies such as the Asia

11

Foundation; (e) the private sector, for support in service delivery and sustainability;
(f) the media and national and subnational communication forums aimed at raising
awareness of child rights; and (g) South-South cooperation.
52. UNICEF and UNFPA will collaborate on maternal and child mortality data
collection and maternal, newborn and child health. The two agencies will also target
in-school adolescents with life-skills programmes; UNICEF will focus on children
aged 10-14 years. UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Health Organization will build
on each other’s strengths to ensure the most effective use of resources in targeting
vulnerable populations.
53. UNICEF and UN-Habitat will coordinate efforts regarding provision of social
services in peri-urban areas.
54. The exchange of information, experiences and expertise on issues related to
children and women will continue through the Alliance for Children, a group of
NGOs currently working on these issues.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
55. Monitoring and evaluation will be harmonized with the national, sectoral and
UNDAF monitoring and evaluation system. It will (a) support the Office of the
Prime Minister and the National Statistical Office to develop a policy and strategy
for child-sensitive monitoring and evaluation of the National Development Strategy
across all sectors; (b) support harmonization of management information systems
and provide technical support for establishment of standards for national statistics
and research; (c) strengthen surveillance and survey systems to ensure timely
availability of valid disaggregated data and analysis on the situation of children and
women; and (d) increase access to strategic information for performance monitoring
and reporting on children.
56. The programme’s field monitoring system will be strengthened through careful
selection of performance management indicators and targets, including data
disaggregated by gender and age, and improved use of financial and programmatic
field monitoring reports.
57. Overall management will be led by an Inter-Ministerial Country Programme
Management Team chaired by the Prime Minister. Members will come from the
programme’s counterpart ministries, government agencies, the National Council for
Children, National Authority for Children, civil society, a cademia and the UNICEF
country management team.
58. Major data gathering, review, analysis and knowledge management activities
for each programme component will be consolidated within the framework of the
Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan and coord inated with national partners
and the United Nations country team through the UNDAF. This will include
evaluations and surveys, a situation analysis of children and midterm and annual
reviews with partners.

12

