Montenegro
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Montenegro
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.3) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2003)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest, 2007)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2007)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2005)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

0.1
9
2
2/1, 4/1
13 a
98/97 b
97 c

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

98

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

92

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)

10

Birth registration (%, under 5 year, 2005-2006)

98

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

97/99, 98/99, 94/99
6 550

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

92

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

86

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org.
a
15 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
b
Survey data.
c
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Less than five years after regaining independence, Montenegro became a
candidate for membership of the European Union (EU) on 17 December 2010.
Montenegro has made measurable progress in harmonizing its legal framework with
international standards, and multiple layers of reform are underway. De spite the
impact of the global financial crisis it remains an upper-middle-income country and
is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals. As a successful
multi-ethnic, geopolitically stable country, with a national agenda that emphasizes
children’s rights, Montenegro is in a strong position to facilitate equitable outcomes
for all children.
2.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child delivered its first Concluding
Observations for Montenegro in October 2010. In November 2010, the EU delive red
its positive “Opinion” on the country’s application for membership. Both landmark
documents have important implications for the situation of women and children,
illustrating that, despite progress, disparities represent an impediment to the
fulfilment of child rights.

2

3.
The impact of the global economic crisis and consequent economic decline of
-5.7 per cent resulted in increased poverty and inequalities in 2009. The overall
poverty rate in 2009 rose from 4.9 to 6.8 per cent, while the Gini coefficien t reached
1.4 — two thirds higher than in 2008. 1 Regional disparities have been further
exacerbated by the crisis: 62 per cent of the poor live in the northern part of the
country. Families with two or more children have a poverty risk of twice the
national average. 2 While the economy is expected to recover during the next few
years, macro-economic challenges will remain.
4.
Refugees and unregistered Roma remain among the most vulnerable people in
Montenegro. Almost 40 per cent of Roma, of whom two thirds a re children, are
without either birth or citizenship documentation. 3 Their illiteracy rate is 42 per
cent, reaching up to 55 per cent for women. 4 A little over one third of primaryschool-aged Roma children access a full cycle of primary education, and fewer than
14 per cent have access to preschool. 5 The country’s first early learning and
preschool strategy, adopted in September 2010, paves the way for breaking the cycle
of exclusion for all vulnerable girls and boys.
5.
According to official statistics from Montenegro, the national under-five
mortality rate was reduced by half over the past five years, reaching 6 deaths per
1,000 live births in 2009. 6 UNICEF research has indicated that the under-five
mortality rate is approximately three times higher for Roma. 7 The current
HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is 0.01 per cent (Institute for Public Health, Annual
Report on HIV/AIDS in Montenegro, 2009). However, research funded by Irish Aid
conducted among Roma most-at-risk-adolescents, revealed low levels of knowledge
on HIV/AIDS; evidence of high-risk behaviour among males; and low levels of
formal education, especially among girls.
6.
Gender issues require further attention. There are currently 10 female
parliamentarians out of 81, and few women hold senior leadership positions.
Domestic violence and attitudes towards gender-based violence are worrying.
Positive developments include the adoption of the Law on Protection from Family
Violence in 2010, which includes measures to protect children from family violence
and to prevent violence in families at risk. However, capacity-building and
additional investments in systemic infrastructure are necessary.
7.
Efforts are needed to engender respect for protection of minorities and
vulnerable groups such as children with disabilities. This is a first step towards
equitable socio-economic development to support the elimination of disparities.
Adoption of the Law on Anti-Discrimination in 2010 represents an important
achievement in strengthening the legal framework.
8.
Attitudes towards children with disabilities are changing, and there have been
positive steps in promoting social inclusion. Knowledge, attitudes and practices
surveys conducted at the beginning and end of the first phase of the 2010 campaign
__________________
1
2
3

4
5
6
7

Montenegro Statistical Agency (Monstat),2010 (www.monstat.org).
Monstat, “Poverty Analysis in Montenegro”, 2009.
UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refuges (UNHCR),
“Civil Registration and the Prevention of Statelessness: A survey on RAE in Montenegro ”, 2009.
Monstat, Database on RAE Population in Montenegro”, 2009.
Ibid.
Monstat, 2010, Statistical Yearbook, table 4-10, “Birth rates, death rates and marriages”, p. 45.
UNICEF, “Breaking the Cycle of Exclusion: Roma children in South-East Europe”, 2007.

3

“It’s About Ability” revealed positive trends in attitudes towards inclusion of
children with disabilities in society. The percentage of people who believe that
children with disabilities should only live in special institutions has dropped, and
parents are more open than ever before to friendship and inclusive classes. 8 While
significant steps have been taken to advance policies that promote inclusive
education, implementation is still a challenge, and addressing social norms takes
time. Development of a comprehensive set of alternative services for children
without parental care and children with disabilities continues to require special
focus. As stated in the Strategy for Social and Child Welfare Development in
Montenegro, some elements of the country’s social protection system do not comply
with international commitments.
9.
Round 3 of the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and UNICEF research on
early childhood development reveal the need for more attention to promotion of
breastfeeding, involvement of fathers and alternatives to physical punishment of
children. More than half of respondents — 55 per cent — admitted hitting their
child at least once a week preceding the survey. 9 A survey at a school found that
around 48 per cent of children (51 per cent boys and 49 per cent girls) were victims
of bullying. 10
10. The Government of Montenegro has invested significant efforts in judicial
reform. The first-ever Law on Juvenile Justice has been drafted, and there is
recognition of the need for a separate juvenile justice system and a fully protective
environment.
11. Continuous harmonization of legislation with international instruments is
needed, as well as more effective implementation of domestic legislation and
policies. Public administration needs strengthening. The infrastruct ure for child
rights monitoring needs to be cultivated, particularly through the Ombudsman ’s
Office, Council on Child Rights, civil society and academia. Further development of
statistical systems is needed to establish consolidated systems for comprehensi ve
collection and analysis of data.
12. Decentralization, full democratization and accountability remain ongoing
challenges. Practices at local level need to be harmonized with legislation. Greater
participation and motivation of service providers, civil society, parents, children and
young people are needed to encourage equitable human development.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2010-2011
Key results achieved
13. In a short period the country programme has contributed to results that are
taking Montenegro closer to the goal of achieving an “ethos for children”. The
programme has contributed to increased harmonization of the child -related legal
framework with United Nations and EU standards. It has also helped in tackli ng
social norms that require sustained focus to achieve lasting social change.
__________________
8
9
10

4

UNICEF, 2010.
UNICEF, 2009.
UNICEF, 2007.

14. Legal reforms in juvenile justice, protection from trafficking and preschool
education have advanced the rights and protection of children in Montenegro.
Within the EU-funded programme on reform of the juvenile justice system, the
country’s draft Juvenile Justice Law was developed with UNICEF support. Fully in
line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, it is paving the way for a
separate juvenile justice system and implementation of alternative sanctions to
incarceration. The Law on Protection from Family Violence, adopted in July 2010,
was developed with support from the United Nations system and the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The Action Plan for the
Implementation of the National Strategy on Anti-Trafficking was adopted in January
2010.UNICEF contributed to development of the early learning and preschool
education strategy. It is the first step towards achieving the inter-ministerial goal of
adopting a national early childhood development policy. The EU Opinion on the
country’s application for membership made specific reference to adherence to
UNICEF standards in reform of the child care system.
15. The Government and UNICEF jointly supported a nationwide campaign in
support of inclusion of children with disabilities. A multi-layered initiative, “It’s
About Ability”, involved over 100 partners in a mass media campaign, combined
with grass-roots communication for development and progra mmatic interventions in
inclusive education and de-institutionalization. The effort emerged from evidence of
widespread discrimination towards children with disabilities, including those in
institutional care, that jeopardized achievement of programme obje ctives. An
evaluation of the first phase of the campaign revealed promising findings: the
percentage of people who think that children with disabilities should only live in
special institutions dropped by 19 points, from 40 per cent to 21 per cent. The
percentage of people who believe it is in the best interests of children with
disabilities to live in institutions and not with their families dropped by 11 per cent.
16. The first Situation Analysis of Children in Montenegro was published in 2011,
following extensive consultation with a broad range of government and
non-governmental actors. It provided a solid body of evidence for rights -based
policymaking. This led to important policy and public discussions on issues
including parenting practices, disability, minority rights, inclusion and violence
against children and women.
17. A key achievement has been an increase in participation by children and youth,
through strengthened cooperation with civil society. This came in response to the
findings of the external evaluation conducted as part of the juvenile justice system
reform project; the findings of the situation analysis; and the aim to build an
infrastructure for monitoring child rights. Ongoing work on most -at-risk adolescents
led to quantifiable empowerment of Roma adolescents, who have formed their own
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Lessons learned
18. Implementation of the programme has confirmed that laws and strategies are a
vital prerequisite for progress, but results will only be sustai nable if implementation
is guaranteed through strategic investments for children. This implies allocation of
resources and further building of capacities at all levels, including in tertiary
education.

5

19. Assisting Montenegro through its reforms requires facilitating access to highquality technical expertise, convening diverse partners and modelling and localizing
successful approaches from other contexts. It also calls for working closely with
civil society and with children and young people themselves as agents of change.
Strong communication strategies are crucial for influencing public attitudes and
policymaking.
20. A 2010 external evaluation in juvenile justice revealed the importance of
increasing the programme focus on prevention and strengthening linkages between
education, social protection and justice. It also underscored the need to obtain
complete data and to increase the focus of UNICEF on child participation. It
highlighted key results achieved in a short period and the importance of continu ed
investment to ensure sustainability and long-term impact.
21. Montenegro suffered the worst floods in its history in late 2010 and is prone to
earthquakes. The Government and UNICEF have agreed that a stronger focus on
disaster risk reduction is essential, focusing in particular on vulnerable children.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child protection and social inclusion

1 500

4 800

6 300

Child rights, policies and planning

1 500

2 700

4 200

750

500

1 250

3 750

8 000

11 750

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
22. This programme is a full articulation of priority areas identified in the 2010 2011 country programme document, which had a medium-term vision, as agreed
with the Government. The strategic focus emanates from discussions on the unique
contribution that UNICEF can make in light of the country’s national priorities and
middle-income status and partnership in the context of the Delivering as One
approach. The annual review/strategy meeting between the Government and
UNICEF (15 December 2010) validated key results. Broad consultations took place
with national and international partners. Together with the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF made a formal presentation to the international
community and civil society on 14 February 2011. A consultation with children and
young people took place via social media.
Goals, key results and strategies
23. The overall goal is to aid efforts by Montenegro to increase equity and ensure
the inclusion of children and women who are in need of special protection, live in
poverty or are socially marginalized.

6

24. Ongoing reforms affecting children and young people will be harnessed to
build on progress in ensuring that all girls and boys grow up healthy, educated,
protected and able to develop and contribute to their full potential. To this end, the
country programme will continue to prioritize partnerships, inc luding emerging
partnerships with the private sector; capacity- and system-strengthening;
communication for development; and facilitating access to validated solutions that
effectively support the Government and civil society in efforts to accelerate equit y
and inclusion for all boys and girls.
25. The programme will contribute to the following key results by the end of
2016: (a) Montenegro addresses disparities and gaps in access to quality social
services for excluded and vulnerable boys, girls and famili es in line with United
Nations standards; (b) the country’s legal framework is harmonized with EU/United
Nations standards, and policies relevant to child-focused governance and social
inclusion of children are implemented and monitored; and (c) national a nd local
authorities systematically apply the principles and standards of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and Copenhagen criteria (for membership in the EU) and
facilitate independent monitoring.
26. The country programme comprises two mutually reinforcing components:
child protection and social inclusion; and child rights, policies and planning. These
reflect the need for continuity in supporting the Government and institutions to
complete the child care system reform agenda and implement policie s and strategies
for children at central and local levels; securing investment in equitable inclusion
and protection of the most vulnerable and marginalized groups; strengthening
capacities in planning, child rights monitoring and budgeting; and implementi ng the
framework for a sustainable legacy of child rights.
27. Communication for development will be a key strategy. The participation of
children and young people will strengthen the programme ’s thrust in social
inclusion, HIV prevention, environmental sustainability, educational quality,
minority rights, gender equality and prevention of violence, abuse and neglect.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
28. The priorities of the country programme correspond closely to the Concluding
Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the EU Opinion and
Analytical Report. The programme is aligned with the National Programme of
Integration to the European Union and with many national strategies, including the
Judicial Reform Strategy (2007-2012), Strategy for Social and Child Welfare
Development (2008-2012), Roma strategies and action plans, and the national
strategy for inclusive education.
29. The second phase of the United Nations Integrated Programme/United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2012-2016 was developed in tandem
with the Government, and key outcomes were validated in a strategic retreat with
the Government in October 2010. The United Nations programme will contribute to
joint priorities around three pillars: democratic governance, social inclusion and
sustainable economic development, and environmental protection.
Relationship to international priorities

7

30. The Millennium Declaration, Millennium Development Goals and priorities of
the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan are integrated into the country programme.
It has a strong focus on child protection, gender equality, equity and social
inclusion.
31. The programme’s focus areas — juvenile justice; child care system reform;
social inclusion of children with disabilities and Roma; young people’s health,
development and participation; and human resource development and legal
reform — are particularly relevant in supporting the Government to meet
obligations outlined by the Committee on the Rights of the Chi ld, the European
Union and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Programme components
Child protection and social inclusion
32. This component aims to accelerate implementation of the agenda on reform of
the child care system and to secure greater investment and action in equity,
inclusion and protection for the most vulnerable boys and girls. This includes
children with disabilities, Roma, refugees, children living in poverty, children in
conflict with the law, children without parental care, and victims of violence, abuse
and neglect.
33. Child care system reform anticipates the following results: (a) an increase of at
least 30 per cent in the proportion of children and families having access to
preventive and inclusive programmes in the social welfare, health and education
systems; and (b) an increase of at least 25 per cent in the proportion of children with
access to family-based and community-based alternatives to institutionalization. The
focus will be on transforming residential institutions; preventing family separation
through enhanced support to the health and social welfare systems; monitoring
internationally agreed standards in maternity wards; supporting vulnerable families;
sustainable and effective implementation of inclusive education, building on results
achieved to date; changing attitudes to and practices in de -institutionalization,
fostering and adoption; and building local capacities for family support and family substitute services.
34. The programme will strongly emphasize capacity development, through
specialized assistance for development and implementation of standards, and it will
facilitate international knowledge transfer and lessons learned. To ensure that the
system can meet legal and policy obligations and respond to growing demand for
inclusive education and family and family-substitute services, the programme will
model new approaches based on validated best practice, prioritizing sustainability.
35. Building on achievements to date, juvenile justice programming will focus on
implementation of the law developed in the previous programme cycle, further
capacity development, expansion of free legal aid to juveniles, wider use of
alternative sanctions and further strengthening of preventive measu res and
programmes, including protection of children from violence. The programme will
continue to benefit from strong support from the EU in juvenile justice and child
care system reform. Key results include an increase of at least 30 per cent in the
availability of gender-sensitive community-based alternatives for children in
conflict with the law.

8

36. Additional programmes will be made available to address violence against
women and children; gender-appropriate standards for multi-sectoral responses to
child abuse, neglect and exploitation will be activated; and programmes aimed at
preventing sexual exploitation and trafficking will be strengthened. To contribute to
changing attitudes about violence, the programme will work in partnership with
other United Nations agencies and NGOs to gather evidence, raise awareness and
improve behaviour. The programme will engage in work to prevent sex tourism, in
close cooperation with the Government Office for the Fight against Trafficking in
Human Beings, line ministries and civil society.
37. To encourage social inclusion, special attention will be given to supporting
early development and inclusive education for children with disabilities and Roma;
encouraging social norms that support equity, inclusion and birth reg istration for
Roma and refugee children; social inclusion of Roma, including support to children
who live or work on the street so that they may realize their rights; measuring and
reducing child poverty; and preventing vulnerability as a result of natural disasters.
The programme will contribute to the United Nations integrated programme pillar
on social inclusion, which covers many areas, including health care, education,
social protection, employment and civic engagement.
38. The programme will contribute to changes in attitudes and social norms to
facilitate inclusive practices towards vulnerable and excluded children;
implementation of policies, practices, programmes and budgets that prevent and
redress exclusion of children; and strengthening of initia tives to address the needs
and rights of the most at-risk, vulnerable and disadvantaged adolescents. The
programme will also ensure that all school-aged children have access to knowledge
on disaster risk reduction.
39. The best possible start to life will be fostered through implementation of a
comprehensive early childhood development policy. Technical support will be
facilitated for implementation of policies on social inclusion. Investments for
children and young people at risk or socially excluded will be increased through
strengthening monitoring and statistical systems at national and local levels, second chance programmes and research on child poverty, and budget analysis and tracking.
The programme will work to encourage participation of young people , particularly
Roma and children with disabilities, as agents of change, including through policy
development in youth and sport. Disaster risk reduction strategies for children will
be implemented through selected schools and municipalities.
40. Major counterparts in the programme will be the Ministries of Labour and
Social Affairs; Justice; Interior; Education and Sport; Health; Finance; Foreign
Affairs and European Integration; and Minority and Human Rights; Bureau of
Educational Services; Institute of Public Health; municipal authorities; preschool
institutions; social welfare centres; local media; civil society organizations; NGOs;
and local associations. International and local partners include other United Nations
agencies, the EU, OSCE, Council of Europe and embassies.
41. Regular resources will be used mainly to make core local and international
expertise available to the Government and other partners. Other resources will be
mobilized to support modelling and innovation, communication for developmen t
and system reform.

9

Child rights, policies and planning
42. This programme aims to support ongoing efforts to create a robust
infrastructure for children’s rights in Montenegro. It incorporates a strong legal
framework; effective implementation of laws and policies at national and local
levels; reliable data on children; strong professional and administrative capacities;
strengthened governance and accountability mechanisms for children; and
independent monitoring of child rights.
43. Support to effective implementation and monitoring of the legislative
framework is a key priority in the country’s development agenda. Institutional
capacity for child rights monitoring requires further sustained support, as does
leadership and coordination on children’s issues at the national and municipal
levels. Adequate statistics and analysis in general, and on children in particular, will
have a profound impact on planning, decision-making and reform. Strategic
investment in human capital is needed.
44. The following are expected results: (a) relevant legislation is harmonized with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, supports European standards, and is
followed up with implementation; and (b) the Government, Ombudsman’s Office
and Child Rights Observatory collect, analyse and use disaggregated data and
monitor the realization of children and women’s rights in support of evidence-based
policy development. The programme will also provide technical support to ensure
that children’s rights are systematically included and taught at tertiary and
professional institutions.
45. The programme component will use the norms and standards of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Concluding Observations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and the EU Opinion to support evidence based policymaking and practice to sustain the place of children at the heart of the
national and local development and EU accession agendas. The programme will
continue to broaden the base of evidence on children through empirical child centred research and other forms of knowledge transfer, including access to good
practices. These will be shared through a variety of channels, including mass media
and social media.
46. Through continued investment in human resource development, the
programme component will create a framework for a sustainable legacy of child
rights-based planning and for the realization of child rights at national and local
levels. It will strengthen the Ombudsman’s Office through implementation of the
capacity development strategy prepared in the previous programme. The programme
will create a Child Rights Observatory composed of respected figures in
Montenegro who will support independent monitoring of the promotion and
protection of children’s rights. It will also strengthen relations with the Parliament
of Montenegro.
47. It is anticipated that negotiations around the relevant chapters of the acquis
communautaire (EU body of law) will give appropriate weight to children’s rights.
This will be made possible by assisting Montenegro in accessing regional and
international expertise for developing, revising and implementing laws and policies,
including a new National Plan of Action for Children. The programme will support
decentralization through development, revision and implementation of local plans of

10

action for children, and facilitation of in-country knowledge exchange. It will also
support greater participation of girls, boys and young people in matters affecting
them.
48. Significant attention will be given to ensuring that professional capacities to
fulfil obligations to children meet appropriate standards. Skills in research, policy
development, planning and service delivery for children will be further developed at
central and local levels through international networking. Specific attention will be
paid to supporting ethical and rights-based journalism through the roll-out of the
child rights syllabus for journalism students and strengthened capacities of public
administration officials. A master ’s degree in child rights, conceptualized in the
previous cycle, will become operational.
49. Major counterparts will be the Ministries of Labour and Social Welfare;
Justice; Interior; Health; Education and Sport; and Foreign Affairs and European
Integration; the Statistical Office of Montenegro; Ombudsman ’s Office; Human
Resource Management Agency; Parliament and universities. Municipal authorities,
local media, civil society organizations, NGOs and youth groups will be key
partners. International partners include other United Nations agencies, the EU,
OSCE, Council of Europe, Open Society Institute and the World Bank.
50. Regular resources will be devoted to policy development and implementation,
participatory monitoring and social mobilization, capacity-building and local,
national and international expertise. Other resources will be mobilized for specific
programme interventions.
51. Cross-sectoral costs cover salaries of cross-cutting staff; travel, training and
equipment, as necessary; and additional operational support to country office
management and administration.
Major partnerships
52. The programme will work with the Government, parliamentarians,
professional associations, academic institutions, the media, local municipal
authorities and services, and civil society. International partners will include other
United Nations agencies; the EU; Council of Europe; World Bank; OSCE;
embassies and governments with diplomatic accreditation to M ontenegro; National
Committees for UNICEF; and the private sector. The programme will pay specific
attention to fostering partnerships with the private sector to leverage resources and
corporate social responsibility.
53. As the programme is designed to contribute to a sustainable legacy for
children, partnerships are essential to leverage both short -term and long-term
results.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
54. The programme will make use of key indicators that monitor fulfilment of
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and EU Opinion; the
ratio of children in institutional versus family or community -based care; and the
number and quality of situation and thematic analyses on the realization of the rights
of children and women, based on a human rights and gender analysis framework.
Data will be disaggregated by gender, ethnicity and location.

11

55. Studies planned include an updated situation analysis of children and women
(2015) and studies on children who live or work on the street, and sexual
exploitation; knowledge, attitudes and practices surveys; and public expenditure
tracking surveys in education and health. Special efforts will be made to support line
ministries and local partners to collect and analyse data o n children, including
through TransMONEE. External evaluations will be undertaken of the child care
system reform project, and implementation of inclusive education and juvenile
justice system reform. Support will be given to analytical research concerning social
inclusion of children with disabilities and Roma.
56. Programme activities are coordinated with an integrated monitoring and
evaluation plan, supplemented by regular field monitoring in line with the modality
of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers. Joint monitoring and field visits by
UNICEF and government counterparts will take place regularly, with the
participation of other United Nations agencies and donors, where relevant.
57. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration is th e coordinating
government partner. It serves with UNICEF as co-chair of the Country Programme
Action Team, an inter-sectoral body at deputy minister level. A midterm review will
take place in 2014.
58. The UNICEF Montenegro office will move to the United Nations “Eco
Premises” in Podgorica in 2012.

12

