Morocco
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Morocco
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.10) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

11

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

38

Underweight (% moderate and severe, 2003-2004)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

9
6/12 3/15
130 a
92/87

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

76

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

81

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

69

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old)
Birth registration (% children under 5 years, 2000)

8
85

(urban/rural)

92/80

GNI per capita (US$)

2 790

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

†
a

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
110 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Morocco has a population of 31.6 million and is experiencing demographic
changes which increase the proportion of adolescents and yout h. Despite its
estimated gross per-capita national income of $2,790 per year, placing it in the
middle-income category, it has failed to progress up the Human Development Index
(HDI) because of structural problems with access to the most vulnerable members of
the population. There are major challenges because of disparities, mainly between
rural areas (home to 43 per cent of the population) and urban areas, but more
particularly between the richest 20 per cent (with 30 per cent of national income)
and the poorest 20 per cent (with 2 per cent of national income). As an example,
illiteracy stands at 34 per cent in urban areas but 67 per cent in rural areas;
preschool enrolment stands at 65 per cent in urban areas but under 36 per cent in
rural areas; the poverty rate is 4.7 per cent in urban areas but 14.2 per cent in rural
areas. Disparities are also seen in the enjoyment of the right to information, despite
more diverse supply, including Arabic and Amazigh media. Significant disparities
also remain between men and women. With a Human Development Index of 0.567
and a gender inequality index of 0.693 Morocco is a middle ranking country. In
2011, women account for 15 per cent of the current Government positions, 9.5 per
cent of elected members of the parliament. In 2009 women account for 19.7 per
cent of judges (compared to 17.3 per cent in 2003). In 2010, according the High

2

Commission of Planning, the employment rate was 26.7 per cent for women and
73.3 per cent for men.
2.
Morocco is on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, although
inequalities remain. Health indicators are improving, but show wide disparities: the
infant and child mortality rate is three times higher for the poorest lower quintile
than for the richest upper quintile (79 deaths per thousand live births as against 26
deaths per thousand live births). The under-five mortality rate remains high (38
deaths per thousand live births), chiefly because of neonatal mortality, which
accounts for two thirds of that figure. The proportion of under-fives who are
underweight is 10 per cent. The main causes of child mortality are infections,
diarrhoea, pregnancy-related complications, difficult access to treatment and lack of
financial resources, failure to use health-care services and the low proportion of
gross domestic product devoted to health care (5.8 per cent in 2008, compared to
5 per cent in 2001). Maternal mortality remains very high, at 130 per 100,000 live
births, and is 43 per cent higher in rural areas than in urban areas.
3.
The right to education has been furthered through major reforms in connection
with the National Education and Training Charter (2000 -2009) and the 2009-2012
Emergency Programme. However, challenges remain in terms of governance,
quality and access to the education system for the most vulnerable children. As an
example, 35 per cent of fourth-year primary pupils possess basic mathematics skills.
In 2009, the proportion of pupils attending secondary school (ages 12 -14) was
44 per cent. In rural areas, the figure is only 16 per cent for girls, compared with
22.5 per cent for boys. Primary and secondary schools suffer from weak internal
effectiveness, with 340,000 pupils dropping out every year. The proportion of pupils
who repeat at least one school year is 47 per cent at primary level and 68 per cent at
secondary level. The proportion completing school is 76 per cent at primary level
and 48 per cent at secondary level. Only 17 per cent of pupils in non -formal
education progress to formal or vocational education.
4.
While Moroccan legislation is now largely in line with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, weak implementation leaves children, particularly the most
vulnerable, still exposed to various abuses and violations of their rights. More than
172,000 children aged 7 to 15 work, 70,000 live in institutions though they are often
not orphaned, 6,500 are abandoned at birth each year, a nd 10,000 are identified as
having suffered serious violence. Those in positions of responsibility find enforcing
rights difficult, because of inadequate support structures, lack of public funds to
protect children and limited monitoring and evaluation.
5.
In consolidating the social policy reform begun a decade ago in Morocco,
particularly against the background of the world economic crisis, it has become
regularly apparent that efforts must focus urgently on the poorest if social indicators
are to improve. However, current methods of measurement only provide a gauge of
poverty and vulnerability in financial terms; they ignore social factors and therefore
stand in the way of accurate targeting of efforts. Work is under way to analyze
budget resources, diversify human development measures and harmonize social
policies. Morocco has achieved significant progress in decentralization in fields
including local issues. The new community charter ado pted in 2009 increased
communities’ responsibility for incorporation of children’s rights into planning and
managing local development. What is still needed is capacity building for elected
officials and a transfer of responsibilities backed by sufficient community income.

3

Paralleling these measures is the major step in local governance brought by the
regionalization project launched by the King on 3 January 2010. Morocco is
demonstrating great political will and is working to improve handling of
emergencies. The current greatest threats are flooding and earthquakes.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
6.
Four of the key results of the 2007-2001 cooperation programme deserve to be
singled out, as they open the way to strategy changes with direct effects on the lives
of children, particularly the most vulnerable. Following concerted advocacy by
UNICEF, and efforts to improve basic staples, nutrition was recognized as a public
health issue, leading to a national nutrition strategy including the promotion of
breast feeding. This achievement was backed by UNICEF technical support, which
helped in the development of a strategy to reduce neonatal mortality and mother -tochild transmission of HIV.
7.
The second result relates to the right to education. The strategic framework for
education reform included many innovative steps supported by UNICEF: quality
initiatives (in preschool, primary, secondary and non-formal education); training
evaluation, regional and local curriculums; regional and local modules for teaching
integration; evaluation and certification methods; a psycho -social competency
framework, and arrangements for teaching life skills development (primary,
secondary and on-formal education), providing Morocco with an innovative
framework of “Schools of Respect”, a concept extended regionally with the support
of the UNICEF regional office.
8.
To further the pursuit of a protective environment for children, the first
national forum on social policies and the rights of the child, held in May 2009,
consolidated the achievements of the child protection programme and resulted in the
conclusion of an agreement with the High Commission for Planning and the
National Observatory of Child Rights to improve the production, analysis and
dissemination of strategic data on childhood as key components of the future
development of social policies sensitive to the rights of the child, as recommended
in the recent report on Morocco of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
9.
In connection with local development, the pilot experiment for participatory
planning strategy at community level supported by UNICEF was institutionalized by
the Government through the new Charter adopted in 2009. Communities must
establish community development plans using the tools and methods developed as
part of the UNICEF-Morocco cooperation programme, for example, the community
information system. The Ministry of Internal Affairs uses other development
agencies to help communities throughout the country to establish development
plans.
Lessons learned
10. The significant legislative reforms adopted continue to have a limited effect on
the lives of the population because of inconsistent implementation. Particular effort

4

should be devoted to building the capacity of those in a position of responsibility to
be aware of the laws adopted and to implement them.
11. Pilot experiments for participatory planning strategy at community level and
models for improving the quality of education were institutionaliz ed and extended
in coverage through mechanisms operating at central, regional, provincial and local
levels and local capacity building based on training and action. This process were
time-consuming, and stretched over two cooperation cycles.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programme

Child survival

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

890

5 200

6 090

1 159

5 200

6 359

967

4 366

5 333

Local development and child and youth rights

1 199

5 200

6 399

Social policy, monitoring and evaluation

1 301

2 600

3 901

529

3 434

3 963

6 045

26 000

32 045

Basic education and adolescent development
Child protection

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Approximately 60 per cent of the total budget will be used for upstream work
(see paragraph 15). 40 per cent of the budget will be used to support
implementation of national policies in the field of which 50 per cent of the
Oriental region, 25 per cent for Sous Massa Draa, 25% for Marrakech Tensift Al
Haouz region.
Preparation process
12. Following the mid-term review of the UNICEF-Morocco cooperation
programme and the United Nations system-Morocco cooperation programme
(United Nations Development Assistance Framework, UNDAF), the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the United Nations Resident Coordinator led a joint analysis of
the comparative advantages of the system and of the common country assessment
(CCA). That analysis served as the basis for a number of consultations between
United Nations system representatives in Morocco and national partners, followed
by preparation of the UNDAF. The CCA and UNDAF were used by UNDP, UNFPA
and UNICEF to prepare their country programme documents, which were presented
jointly for approval to the national authorities.
Programme and component results and strategies
13. The aim of the programme is to speed progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals and the establishment of a protective and fair environment for
all children in Morocco, particularly the most vulnerable. The guiding principles
behind the action taken will be a human rights focus, integration of gender equality

5

and a sustainable environment. Implementation strategies will include capacity
building at all levels; communication for development; the development of new
strategic partnerships; knowledge management, including risks and their
determining factors; advocacy; convergence of action; preparedness to respond to
humanitarian situations and South-South cooperation.
14. The cooperation programme, which covers three strategic areas of intervention
(strengthening of basic social services, creation of a protective environment,
decentralization) is aimed at: (a) providing improved access for vulnerable people to
quality maternal, neonatal, post-neonatal and nutritional care in two regions and
ensuring greater equity in health programmes and policies; (b) providing access to
equitable and better-quality basic education on a sustainable basis, especially for
disadvantaged children and adolescents; (c) providing better protection for
vulnerable children, in particular those without a family and community, from all
forms of violence, abuse and exploitation and reducing their vulnerability;
(d) ensuring that the rights of children, adolescents, young p eople and women,
especially the most vulnerable, are taken into account in the system of local
government and that programmatic responses aimed at reducing inequality of access
to such rights are developed in the context of local public policy convergence;
(e) ensuring that the development, implementation and evaluation of social policies
for children are based on data and evidence-based analyses and supported by
effective communication and advocacy leading to social change and positive
behaviour, including optimal targeting and budgets and legislation that are sensitive
to the rights of the most vulnerable children.
15. Apart from the strategic actions to be conducted at the national level, this
cooperation programme identifies three main geographical areas of action and
convergence for the education, child survival, local development and child
protection programmes: the Sous Massa Draa, Marrakech-Tensift-Al Haouz and
Oriental regions. They were selected because of their high poverty rate, poor
performance in the areas of education, health and nutrition measured against
relevant indicators and as a result of commitments entered into between the
Government and UNICEF and donors. The relative rural poverty rate s in these
regions are 18.3 per cent, 13 per cent and 15 per cent, respectively (national
average: 14 per cent). The primary school dropout rates in those three regions are
4 per cent, 5 per cent and 4 per cent, respectively (national average: 3 per cent). The
repeat rates are 14 per cent, 14 per cent and 13 per cent, respectively (national
average: 12 per cent). The child survival component of this cooperation programme
is to be implemented only in the Sous Massa Draa and Marrakech -Tensift-Al Haouz
regions, where the proportions of underweight under-fives are 15 per cent and
22 per cent, respectively (national average: 10 per cent). Support for the National
Programme to Combat HIV/AIDS to extend coverage to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV will be provided in five regions where the epidemic is
widespread among sex workers, injecting drug users, men who have sex with men:
Sous Massa Draa, Marrakech-Tensift-Al Haouz, Casablanca, Tanger-Tétouan and
Rabat-Sale-Zemmour-Zaer. At the national level, the cooperation programme will
help develop advocacy, strategic information on children, policies and strategies,
standards for service delivery and relevant assessment tools, capacity-building for
those in positions of responsibility and legislation and budgets sensitive to child
rights.

6

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
16. The components of this cooperation programme are directly linked to the five
priority areas of the UNDAF: (a) strengthened gender equality in education and
training and improved quality of education and training; (b) improved health and
nutrition, including mother and child nutrition, especially in underprivileged
environments; (c) inclusive and egalitarian socio-economic development;
(d) strengthened governance; and (e) environmental protection, disaster prevention
and natural disaster risk management. The vulnerable groups targeted by the
UNDAF are women and children, young people and the inhabitants of rural and
peri-urban areas. Preparedness for and response to humanitarian situations is a
common thread that runs through all components of the cooperation programme.
The UNDAF priorities are aligned with the five focal areas for the future identified
in Morocco’s report on fifty years of human development and with national sectoral
strategies.
Relationship to international priorities
17. This cooperation programme, which was developed on the basis of the Paris
Declaration principles, has a direct link with the priorities of the medium -term
strategic plan. It will contribute to the implementation of both the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (to which Morocco no longer has any reservations) and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It
aims at accelerating the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
Morocco is at the crossroads of three major cultures (the Arab world, Europe and
Africa), is also committed to South-South cooperation as a means of implementing
the cooperation programme.
Programme components
18. The child survival component has two subcomponents: equitable access to
health care for the mother and child, and child nutrition. The programme will
contribute directly to reducing maternal and child mortality in two regions that are
behind schedule with respect to implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals and developing more equitable national health policies, including policies on
preventing HIV/AIDS among children, adolescents and young people.
19. The strategic areas of intervention will be human rights, with special emphasis
on equity, capacity-building for health-care professionals for an improved level of
care and management of maternal and infant health programmes at the central
government level and in the two target regions, and care of vulnerable children with
nutritional disorders. Other implementation strategies are aimed at promoting
enhanced equity for an improved targeting of people with limited access to health
care, enhanced partnerships with potential actors such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in the area of nutrition, and
non-governmental organizations, in the area of community health, and by building
on the achievements of the communication for development programme and
advocacy.
20. Basic education and adolescent development has two subcomponents: equitable
access to quality education, including for vulnerable children, and adolescent
development. Quality education (preschool, primary, secondary, formal education)
will entail the establishment of a system of quality formal education, introduction of

7

innovative teaching approaches and aids (management o f schools, overhaul of
curriculums with the introduction of psycho-social and instructional support and
teaching methods, especially for children with learning difficulties ; quality
standards in the context of child friendly schools) and capacity-building for those
providing support. This will cover the most disadvantaged children and adolescents
(girls, children in rural, peri-urban or remote areas) with special needs
(handicapped, street, imprisoned or abandoned children, children of nomads or
migrants). School governance will be pursued as part of quality education through
capacity-building for school principals, the provision of in-school management,
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and tools, improved responsiveness of the
school to its environment and community participation. Priority will be given to
capacity-building at the central government level and also to the provision of
support to the Ministry of Education in implementing its policies in three regions.
Adolescent development (a cross-cutting theme for the whole cooperation
programme, covers children aged 10 to 19) will focus on enhancing participation,
developing psycho-social abilities, and non-formal education, development of life
skills, access to protection services, new information and communication
technologies and sports and cultural activities as a way of preparing pupils for a
smooth transition to adulthood.
21. Child protection comprises two subcomponents: behaviour and social change
and strengthening of national child protection systems. The protection programme
aims at fostering a protective environment where girls and boys, in particular those
without a family and community, are protected from various forms of violence,
abuse and exploitation. The programme will focus on national capacity-building to
promote a global approach combining prevention with assistance with a view to
bringing about a change in social norms and practices by emphasizing the protective
role of the family and local community and enhancing the social protection of the
family and children.
22. Thus the strengthening of national systems of child protection will include
actions that the State is primarily responsible for: the political commitment to
ensure the right to protection, enact the appropriate legal framework and ensure its
implementation and provide for basic social services. Every effort will be made to
develop the skills needed to carry this out.
23. Local development and the rights of children and youth. Moroccan
community authorities enjoy a great latitude in the area of social and human
development; as a result, most of the problems of children, adolescents and youth
will be addressed at the local government level pursuant to national policy. Th e
programme is aimed at mainstreaming the rights of children, adolescents, young
people and women, including the most vulnerable, into policies and programmes at
community level. They are a concerted effort aimed at encouraging community
authorities to contribute to the realization of girls’ and boys’ rights by establishing
appropriate responsive programmes under the community development plans and
bringing about coordination and convergence of the activities of ministries on the
ground. This programme has two subcomponents: (a) providing support for scaling
up community-level participatory and gender-sensitive planning; and
(b) implementing the “child- and youth-friendly community” initiative to build on
the results of community-level planning and fostering a protective environment for
children and young people. The establishment of community-level children’s and
youth councils will be replicated to promote wider participation and will be linked

8

with national initiatives, including the children’s parliament. Following the
universal introduction of the community planning approach, the Direction générale
des collectivités locales (local government department) launched a broad campaign
to popularize this approach under the 2009-2015 national decentralization
programme; UNICEF supports the implementation of this programme.
24. Social policies, monitoring and evaluation. Two subcomponents will be
developed: analysis and evaluation of social policies, monitoring and evaluation,
and knowledge management. This programme aims at improving the analysis of
social policies in the light of the underlying principles of the rights of the child,
identifying the existing shortcomings and promoting evidence -based advocacy in
order to address such shortcomings with the aim of rea lizing the rights of the child,
adolescents and young people and mainstreaming such rights into all Government
policies. It also aims at enabling factually based outr each and advocacy through
cross-cutting knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation action, thus
bringing about positive behavioural changes. The following initiatives will be
supported: (a) mainstreaming of multidimensional child poverty analysis, building
on the results of the 2007-2011 cycle and the results of activities undertaken,
including under the agreement between UNICEF and the High Commission for
Planning; (b) review of the State budget with the rights of the child in mind;
(c) identification and analysis of social protection policies to ensure that they
include special measures for vulnerable people, including poor families with
children; (d) assessment of Government policies through supporting data collection
and analysis; (e) support for information systems and national assessment capacity building; (f) regular reporting on unfulfilled rights of the child in order to bring
about positive measurable changes at the policy level, changes in beha viour and
relevant social norms; (g) factually based planning and programme adjustments
through cross-cutting knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation action.
25. Cross-sectoral costs cover the management of and support for the
implementation of the entire programme and will be aimed at promoting efficient
management in order to create the best possible environment for the implementation
of all the components of the project, while reducing related costs. Specifically, this
component will promote efficient governance, effective management systems and
efficient financial and human resources management. It includes support for day -today UNICEF office activities (management, finance, supplies, information and
communication technology, human resources management, administration).
Major partnerships
26. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation will coordinate activities
undertaken with its technical partners, including the Ministry of Education, Ministry
of Health, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Youth,
Ministry of Social Development and Ministry of Finance. The new strategic
partnerships built with the High Commission for Planning, the National Observatory
of Child Rights, Parliament, the Higher Council for Education and the Council on
Human Rights will lead to early advocacy for a comprehensive policy. Partnership
will be developed with the newly created inter-ministerial Delegation on Human
Rights.
27. Local governments and NGOs will continue to be key actors in the realization
of rights, especially the rights of the most vulnerable people who are barely covered
by national policies. The media, academia and the private sector will play an

9

increasing role, including in knowledge management, communication and resource
mobilization.
28. UNICEF will participate proactively in all initiatives to enhance the coherence
of the activities of the United Nations system in Morocco, including the simplified
UNDAF process, UNDAF action plan, joint programmes, common communication
strategy and annual and midterm reviews of the UNDAF action plan.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
29. Monitoring and evaluation will be a priority. A partnership will be built with
the National Observatory on Human Development, the High Commission for
Planning, the monitoring and evaluation departments of sectoral ministries and the
Association marocaine d’évaluation to strengthen this component. The partnership
with those bodies in the area of monitoring and evaluat ion will make it possible to
gather strategic information that will inform more equitable national policies. A
complete assessment of at least two components of the cooperation programme will
be undertaken during the cooperation cycle.
30. The management of the cooperation programme will be under the supervision
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, with input from the partners
involved in the programme’s implementation. The sectors responsible for
spearheading the implementation of the cooperation programme components will
coordinate activities within their areas of competence. Associations, NGOs and
private-sector stakeholders will participate in these coordination mechanisms.

10

