Mozambique
Country programme document
2012-2015

The draft country programme document for Mozambique
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.37) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

11.6

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

142

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2008)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

18
14/20; 24/8
550 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2008)

82/77 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

44

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

47

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

17

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

11.5

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2008)

22

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2008)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

31
31/31, 39/28, 20/48

GNI per capita (US$)

440

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

76

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

77

†

a

b

More comprehensive country data on women and children can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
410 deaths per 100,000 live births is the estimate developed in the Third General Population
and Housing Census, 2007.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Seventy per cent of Mozambique’s 22.4 million people live in rural areas and
over 50 per cent are under 18 years of age. 1 Poverty levels have remained
unchanged since 2003, at approximately 54 per cent; however, there has also been a
26 per cent increase in consumption-based poverty rates since 2003. 2 Economic
growth, which averaged 7.5 per cent per year during 2005-2010, has not been
equitable, and economic and social disparities have increased. Natural disasters and
disease, low agricultural productivity and population growth have contributed to
persistence of poverty.
2.
The UNICEF country programme 2012-2015 is part of the United Nations
system’s overall initiative “Delivering as One” to the Government of Mozambique
in the final stretch of the Millennium Development Goals timeframe of 2015. The
Government’s 2010 progress report on the Millennium Development Goals
estimated that Mozambique is likely to achieve four of the 21 targets — universal
primary education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases and
global partnerships — with potential to reach nine others. However, high national
averages hide persisting disparities, particularly those affecting children. For
__________________
1
2

2

National Statistics Institute (INE), 2010.
Poverty and Well-being in Mozambique: Third National Poverty Assessment (2008 figures).
Ministry of Planning and Development, 2010.

example, Zambézia province has the highest under-five mortality rate in the
country: 206 per 1,000 live births, compared to the national a verage of 152 per
1,000 live births.
3.
The likelihood of reaching the Millennium Development Goal for maternal
mortality is low, despite an increase in deliveries attended by skilled health
personnel — from 48 per cent in 2003 to 55 per cent in 2008. The maternal
mortality ratio is 500 deaths per 100,000 live births. Pregnancy -related causes
account for 37 per cent of deaths of women in the 15 - 24 age group; 41 per cent of
women in the 15-19 age group had at least one child in 2008; and 52 per cent are
married before the age of 18 and 17 per cent before the age of 15. Women
experience lower social and economic status then men, and suffer higher illiteracy
rates and poorer health, especially in rural areas, where 87 per cent of women are
employed in the informal sector. Some 36 per cent of women believe that the use of
violence by their husbands is justifiable. 3
4.
On the positive side, Mozambique has approved a national Children ’s Act, a
Juvenile Justice Act, a Trafficking Act and a Domestic Violence Act. With the
formation of the National Council for Children, standardized procedures for victims
of violence and minimum standards for vulnerable children have been established.
The National Plan of Action on Birth Registration was adopted in 2006;
approximately 4.2 million children under the age of 18 are now registered.
5.
Despite a decline in the child mortality rate, the Millennium Development
Goal is unlikely to be met, without accelerated progress, particularly in rural areas.
Some 141 out of 1,000 children die before their fifth birthday, 4 one third of them
from malaria. Diarrhoeal diseases, including cholera, cause nearly 10 per cent of
child deaths. Only 47 per cent of households have access to safe drinking water,
with major disparities between provinces, and rural and urban households. Only
17 per cent of households have access to improved sanitation facilities. 5 Stunting
remains at 44 per cent, severely affecting child well-being and development.
6.
HIV is also among the highest causes of child deaths and for children’s
increased vulnerability to poverty and deprivation. 6 Adolescent girls and young
women are three times more likely than their male counterparts to be affected by the
pandemic. 7 According to the first national survey on HIV/AIDS in 2009, prevalence
is 11.5 per cent for men, and 13.1 per cent for women, with significant geographical
variations and disparities by sex and age. There are an estimated 1.8 million orphans
in Mozambique, 510,000 of them orphaned due to AIDS. 8

__________________
3
4
5

6

7

8

Mozambique multiple indicators cluster survey (MICS), 2008.
MICS 2008.
Mozambique Joint Monitoring Programme Report — Progress Update 2010. This report uses
multiple sources of data, including the MICS 2008, in its calculations. According to MICS 2008,
these values are slightly different, with 43 per cent of households having access to safe drinking
water and 19 per cent of households with access to improved sanitation facil ities.
Information based on the Bristol indicators measurement of poverty. PARPA II Impact
Evaluation Report, Maputo, 2009.
Progress Report (2008-2009) to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session, Republic
of Mozambique and National AIDS Council, 2010.
Demographic Impact of HIV/AIDS in Mozambique. Update — Epidemiology Surveillance Round
2008, National Institute of Statistics, Maputo, 2009.

3

7.
Less than 50 per cent of children in Mozambique complete primary education
and 44 per cent of children in primary schools are over-age. Progress in enrolment
masks challenges in the quality of education, and declining learner achievement.
Only 42.8 per cent of children transition to secondary education. Early childhood
development programmes cover only 4 per cent of children under 6. A 2008
Ministry of Education survey revealed that 70 per cent of girls in school believe that
teachers use sexual intercourse as a condition for promotion between grades and 50
per cent of girls said that both teachers and boys in their peer group abuse them
sexually.
8.
Water, sanitation and hygiene continue to be major priorities for the
Government and its development partners. Recent initiatives include the
establishment of the Common Fund for and sector-wide approach (SWAp) to rural
water supply and sanitation, operationalization of a legal and management
framework for urban water supply and sanitation, and establishment of a legal
framework for participation of private sector implementing partners. De spite these
initiatives, the country may not meet the Goals targets for water and sanitation and
the national target of universal coverage by 2025.
9.
Exacerbating all of these realities is the ongoing spectre of natural disasters,
which can tip vulnerable families into desperate need. Mozambique experiences
regular patterns of flooding and cyclones, as well as drought, which impacts rain -fed
agriculture and overall food security.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
10. In collaboration with other United Nations agencies, UNICEF leverages
evidence into action for children by providing support through child statistics and
budget analyses to the Government, Parliament and civil society for the
development of transparent and evidence-oriented budgets and policies, focusing on
the most vulnerable. Tools, such as reader-friendly budget briefs, trigger public
debate on the situation of children and public investment in social sectors. UNICEF
will continue this work in the new programme cycle, using budget training at the
provincial level as an entry point for further capacity building in child -centred
planning and programming, and for developing rights-based tools to monitor results
for the most vulnerable children and to advocate for policy change.
11. Progress has been made in applying lessons learned from local -level successes
to national policy dialogue and change. The Community Approaches to Sanitation,
introduced in 2008 within the One Million Initiative, is a partnership among
UNICEF and the Governments of Mozambique and the Netherlands, aimed at
providing access to safe water and sanitation to one million people by 2013. As of
2010, 466 villages have been declared open defecation free and 650,000 people had
gained access to safe sanitation. Good practices drawn from this experience were a
key input in the development of the SWAp to rural water supply and sanitation.
12. The child-friendly schools (CFS) initiative is a multisectoral, area -based
package that aims to improve the quality of education in primary schools. This
model, based on low enrolment and completion rates and low gender parity, was

4

implemented in seven districts, starting with one district in 2006 -07 and has now
reached nearly 400,000 children and 750 schools. At least 90 per cent of all children
in targeted districts are enrolled in primary schools and 60 per cent complete
primary education (national average is 45 per cent).Over 90,000 orphaned children
are enrolled in schools, and dropout rates have decreased by 2.3 per cent for girls
since 2009. In addition, 360 schools received improved water and sanitation;
275 classrooms were constructed or refurbished; over 133,000 children in grades
1-2 were immunized against tetanus and nearly a million children were dewormed.
Furthermore, the CFS initiative has resulted in the mainstreaming of lessons learned
in multi-sectoral planning and programming into national education policy; the
integration of life skills and prevention of HIV and violence in school and
community planning; and the promotion of multi-sectoral coordination at
decentralized levels to ensure that schools provide quality environments for
children.
13. The 2007-2011 programme was also successful in promoting multi-partner,
multi-level strategies in areas such as prevention of HIV/AIDS and violence, within
wider United Nations and partner collaboration. The application of multiple
strategies and advocacy has moved one of the lowest birth registration rates in the
region to the current coverage of 40 per cent of all children.
Lessons learned
14. The 2010 United Nations Child Poverty Study and the 2010 National
Consumption Poverty Survey 9 highlighted the significant geographical disparities in
access to services for children and their families, between rural and urban areas, and
among provinces. In an effort to address this, the new country programme will take
a three-tiered geographical approach: continue support for decentralized
programming through strengthening of services and capacity development at the
district level; continue support to planning and budgeting in seven provinces, with
particular focus on the two provinces with the greatest equity gaps, while at the
same time working with partners at the national level on wider policy and planning
initiatives for children; and focus nationally on social protection, for the
development of long-term and viable safety nets for the poorest children and their
families.
15. The 2007-2011 programme initiatives led to positive results through
innovation in partnerships. With United Nations partners, UNICEF convenes crosssectoral participation and coordinates links among the Government, the civil society,
the media and the private sector. In particular, powerful partnerships have developed
with the Civil Society Forum on Child Rights, and the Civil Society Budget
Monitoring Forum. In addition, the United Nations in Mozambique has taken on a
new role in SWAps, providing resources through common funds and consistently
reporting its financial resources on the State Budget and national execution reports,
according to the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and Accra
Agenda for Action. This success will form the basis for partnership growth in the
new programme.
16. Positive results achieved through intersectoral and multi -organizational
collaboration in the face of emergencies have proven the value of partnerships and
__________________
9

Family Budget Survey (Inquérito de Orçamento Familiar — IOF), 2010.

5

of strengthening systems for the prevention and mitigation of emergencies. Building
on this experience, the new programme, under Government leadership, will take a
collaborative approach and longer-term focus on disaster risk reduction.
17. The 2010 evaluation of capacity development initiatives highlighted the need
for the development of a more cohesive strategy for capacity development. The
current programme cycle focused on building capacity in logistics and supply chains
in the health sector at the national level, and building capacity in planning,
monitoring and supervising civil construction works at the district level. In the new
cycle, the focus will be on a more holistic and sustainable strategy for institutional
development; capacity building at the provincial district levels; and collaboration
with high-level training institutions to prepare professionals in key areas of child
development.
18. There is a need to strengthen the work of the United Nations and its partners in
cross-cutting programme areas, such as early childhood development, participation
of adolescents and achievement of gender equity. In order to avoid marginalization
of these priorities and ensure their integration into the wider joint programming
within “Delivering as One”, efforts will be made to establish and strengthen crosssectoral task teams, similar to the very effective HIV and AIDS working group and
United Nations collaboration in areas of gender and violence prevention that
functioned during the current programme cycle.

The country programme, 2012-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child health and nutrition

14 800

45 200

60 000

Water, sanitation and hygiene

10 000

38 000

48 000

Basic education

10 800

27 000

37 800

Child protection

8 000

27 800

35 800

Communication, advocacy, participation and
partnerships

7 800

16 200

24 000

Social policy, planning, information and
monitoring

6 000

3 800

9 800

Cross-sectoral costs

6 636

6 000

12 636

64 036

164 000

228 036

Total

Preparation process
19. Mozambique is a pilot country for Delivering as One. The proposed
programme is part of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) 2012-2015, which was developed with the Government of Mozambique,
in dialogue with civil society. It is aligned with the National Poverty Reduction
Strategy 2010-2014, the Millennium Development Goals, and United Nations
conventions, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the

6

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The
overall goal of UNDAF is reduction of poverty and disparities to improve the lives
of the most disadvantaged people in the country. The 21 organizations of the United
Nations system in Mozambique have developed a strategic outcome level UNDAF
and a detailed UNDAF Action Plan, with an accompanying joint monitoring and
evaluation framework, to guide United Nations delivery in the country. 10 It should
be noted that, although a decision was taken not to develop a common CPD
document, the UNDAF Action Plan replaces individual agency action plans, and
will serve as a strong joint framework for programming.
20. Under the leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Co -operation
(MINEC),the country programme was developed through consultations. Another key
feature permeating the UNDAF planning process was joint thinking on culture,
gender and human rights, developed collaboratively, with key leadership from
UNFPA, UNESCO and UNIFEM and with UNICEF support in the area of
programming for human rights. Civil society partners have been instrumental in
bringing the observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to the fore of
public discussion, under the leadership of the Civil Society Forum on Child Rights.
Programme and component results and strategies
21. The main goal of the country programme is to leverage evidence and catalyse
action to reduce disparities and transform children’s lives, and accelerate the
equitable achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. UNICEF will work
towards the achievement of 12 programme component results aligned with
UNDAF’s eight outcomes.
22. UNICEF programming will focus on equity and rights fulfilment for the most
marginalized and vulnerable children, with a cross-cutting focus on capacity
development of duty bearers to create and sustain change. Support will be given to
prioritization of children in policies, planning and budgets; strengthening of
sustainable service delivery at the subnational level; and community i nvolvement in
development, including the participation of children, supported by advocacy for ongoing sectoral decentralization throughout the country. There will be a programmewide focus on evidence-based advocacy for child rights and support for the use of
solid data and analysis in policy decisions and national planning. In line with the
revised Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, UNICEF will take
a distinctive rights-based approach to disaster risk reduction, working with children
and youths to increase community resilience and strengthen disaster management
capacities. The programme will also have a strong focus on gender, environmental
sustainability and the impact of climate change.
23. HIV and AIDS programming will continue to be mainstreamed in each
component. Under the leadership of a multisectoral HIV and AIDS working group,
which, in turn, feeds into the United Nations joint team on HIV and AIDS, cross sectoral action is organized around the four Ps: preventing mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, providing paediatric treatment, preventing infection among
adolescents and young people, and protecting and supporting children affected by
AIDS.
__________________
10

The total number of agencies with contributions in the UNDAF is 21 (10 resident and 11
non-resident).

7

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
24. The UNDAF has been developed in line with the Government’s Five Year Plan
(2010-2014) and its corresponding operational strategy, the Plan for the Reduction
of Poverty 2010-2014. The country programme will contribute to the achievement
of national development goals within eight UNDAF outcomes, which cover three
broad areas: governance, social disparities, and economic disparities. Programme
results will reflect the logic of the three-pronged rights-based strategy developed in
UNDAF to support: national and decentralized capacities for rights delivery;
populations ready to demand and access services; and a national framework of
legislation and policies to support these actions. The programme will also support
the new, cross-sectoral National Plan of Action for Children, coordinated under the
National Council for Children.
Relationship to international priorities
25. The country programme is organized sectorally, in line with government
programming, with emphasis on the focus areas of the medium -term strategic plan.
It also took into consideration the goals of the World Fit for Children and the
Declaration of Commitment of the General Assembly Special Session on
HIV/AIDS, and the accountabilities of UNICEF in the new Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS Division of Labour. UNICEF is co-convener of the UN
joint programme, “Enhancing social protection for people affected by HIV”, and
chairs the United Nations team on the AIDS working group on mitigation.
26. An emerging focus on climate change and its impact will guide programme
planning and implementation. Discussion of climate change is nascent in
Mozambique, but UNICEF will step forward to take leadership in this area,
advocating for the rights of the most vulnerable in planning for results and resources
towards building adaptive capacity to make their lives safer and their communities
more resilient to climate change and natural hazards.
Programme components
27. Child health and nutrition. This programme component will prioritize child
survival in line with the Government’s 2009-2015 Integrated Plan for the
Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals on child mortality and maternal
health, with emphasis on: policy and planning, child health, nutrition (particularly
the reduction of stunting), and HIV (particularly the elimination of paediatric
AIDS). United Nations agencies will pursue health results jointly through the United
Nations Social Sector Development Results Group.
28. Expected results: (a) national policies, operational plans and adequate resource
allocations are in place to improve the health system’s performance; and
(b) vulnerable children and their families have access to, and make use of, quality
promotive, preventive and curative health, nutrition and HIV services. Regular
resources will support technical assistance to Government counterparts for delivery
of essential services to the most vulnerable populations. Other resources will be
sought to expand programme outreach and respond to emergencies, in collaboration
with the wider United Nations system.
29. UNICEF and its United Nations partner agencies will collaborate with the
Ministry of Health and the health directorates of selected provinces in the

8

preparation and implementation of their respective plans. It will remain an active
member of the SWAp to health by providing technical and financial assistance.
UNICEF will also be part of the United Nations joint programmes on health and
nutrition and on HIV/AIDS, and work with non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
for service delivery in hard-to-reach areas and for piloting innovative approaches.
30. Partners will include the Ministry of Health, the Ministry Education, the
Ministry of Women and Social Action, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the
Food and Nutritional Security Technical Secretariat and the National AIDS Council.
Bilateral and multilateral partners will include the Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA), the United Kingdom Department for International
Development (DFID), Irish AID, the Danish International Development Agency
(DANIDA), the Netherlands, Switzerland, the European Union, the World Bank and
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. United Nations partners
will include the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the World Food Programme (WFP) and
the World Health Organization (WHO). Other partners include international and
national NGOs, civil society, academic/training institutions and the private sector.
31. Water, sanitation and hygiene. This component will support the Government
in strategic coordination; reinforcement of data management systems; strategic
studies and knowledge management for equity-focused policy development; and
decentralized implementation to ensure increased access to, and use of, safe and
sustainable water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services by vulnerable groups.
UNICEF will support scaling up of rural water supply and sanitation, with specific
technical support to Tete, Manica, Sofala and Zambézia provinces, and
infrastructure service delivery in schools, capitalizing on lessons learned and good
practices of WASH programmes funded by other development partners, including the
Japan International Cooperation Agency.
32. Expected results: (a) capacities and alliances for strategic coordination are
strengthened and equity and disaster risk reduction-focused policies and systems
developed for sustainable WASH service delivery; and (b) vulnerable populations in
rural and peri-urban areas have improved access to, and use of, safe and sustainable
WASH services. Specific attention will be paid to vulnerable groups and to those
living in remote rural areas and neglected peri-urban areas, and to strengthening the
capacities of the Government and WASH partners at national and subnati onal levels
for emergency preparedness, coordination and response.
33. Partners will include the Ministry of Public Works, through the National Water
Directorate, and the provincial directorates of Public Works and Housing; the
Ministry of State Administration through the district governments and
municipalities; the Ministry of Health; the Ministry of Education; United Nations
agencies; civil society; the private sector; and academic/training institutions.
Bilateral and multilateral partners include: the Netherlands, the Swiss Development
Co-operation, DFID, CIDA, the Japanese International Cooperation Agency, the
Austrian Development Cooperation, the Millennium Challenge Corporation, the
World Bank, the African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank.
34. Basic education. This component will promote the quality of primary
education; age-appropriate school entry; and school retention, with improved
learning levels and transition to secondary education. The development of strategies
for out-of-school children and for early childhood develop ment will be emphasized,

9

as will support to intersectoral collaboration, in line with the Strategic Plan for the
Education Sector, 2012-2016. Results will be sought through the United Nations
Social Sector Development Results Group, supporting joint contri bution to
knowledge, equity and quality through the SWAp, promoting strategic partnerships,
harmonization and efficient utilization of human and material resources. Focus will
be on early learning; school quality; teacher development; development of
children’s life skills (for prevention of HIV/AIDS, violence and sexual abuse) and
promotion of disaster risk reduction; equitable access to education; institutional
capacity development; and the mainstreaming of lessons learned from child -friendly
schools into national policy dialogue and planning. United Nations partners will
support evidence-based programming, through multisectoral, gender-sensitive, safe,
healthy and quality learning environments; capacity development; community -based
care for young child development; provision of school and teacher development
materials; and construction of schools and water and sanitation facilities. Crosscutting focus will be on the prevention of HIV and AIDS in young people (both in
and out of school), and the prevention of violence against girls.
35. Expected results include: (a) policies and standards on school and learner
quality and teacher education are developed, mainstreamed into the national
education system and results focusing on equity are monitored; and (b) t he
Government applies a rights-based, multi-sectoral approach to enable at least 70 per
cent of children to complete a quality basic education in selected districts, with
focus on vulnerable communities and girls.
36. Partners will include the Ministry of Education, training institutions,
educational administrations at decentralized levels and civil society organizations.
Potential areas of common interest and opportunities for synergy with United
Nations agencies (WFP, UNFPA, WHO and UNESCO) and sector par tners (in the
SWAp) have been identified and will contribute to coordinated programming and
harmonized strategies. Internal coordination between programmes will be
strengthened further through the Child-friendly Schools Working Group for
inter-ministerial coordination in the implementation of the multisectoral approach
and to strengthen social action strategies for out-of-school children, especially girls.
Regular resources will be used for sector-pooled funds and policy support while
other resources will support implementation of evidence-based strategies in targeted
areas.
37. Child protection. This component will support joint United Nations and
Government efforts to: ensure that all children are free from violence, abuse,
exploitation and neglect; coordinate a systematic response to child protection,
including provision of quality services; and work for social change at the
community level. It will also support civil society to complement Government -led
programmes. Social protection programmes are supported through a strong joint
United Nations team, and will be linked to disaster risk reduction and response and
contribute to the prevention and mitigation of the impact of HIV/AIDS and chronic
poverty; and improve the resilience and livelihoods of poor households and promote
access to services. Other resources will be used to support a national system for
child protection and a scaled up response to prevention of violence and abuse; and
programmes for the most marginalized households, complemented by additio nal
services in psychosocial support, alternative care and legal protection.

10

38. Expected results: (a) child protection policies, legal framework and systems
are strengthened to create a coordinated multi-sectoral protective environment for
all children, through social change; and (b) social protection programmes and
systems respond effectively to the rights of the poorest and the most vulnerable
children and their families, complemented by quality social welfare services.
39. Partners will include the Ministries of Women and Social Action, Justice,
Interior, Health, Education), civil society, development partners, academia, the
private sector and the media, as well as United Nations agencies, particularly ILO
and WFP, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Bilateral partners
include the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, DFID and the
Royal Netherlands Embassy. In the area of social protection, there is a social action
working group — a donor and government forum that is developing a
comprehensive programme and working towards the formation of a SWAp.
40. Communication, advocacy, participation and partnerships. This
component aims to strengthen the ability of duty bearers and recipients to make
informed decisions, demand services and take key actions related to their own well being, in line with the UNDAF governance area commitments and results.
Employing a mix of communication for development, advocacy and public
awareness strategies, media capacity building, high-visibility events and strategic
use of evidence, the programme will promote the meaningful participation of
children and young people with an imperative to reduce violence and sexual abuse
and the impact of HIV and AIDS on adolescent girls. Civil society and the private
sector will be engaged as key allies in child-friendly development, with particular
attention to the social spaces that exist for children at the local level.
41. Expected results: (a) children, young people, civil society, private sector
representatives and duty bearers participate in the formulation and monitoring of a
transparent and equitable national development agenda; and (b) children, young
people, women and their duty bearers in targeted districts and emergency-prone
areas adopt, sustain, and promote behaviours, attitudes and practices, to improve the
well-being of people, especially to reduce girls’ vulnerability to HIV.
42. The main partners will be the Government Information Office (within the
Prime Minister’s Office), the National Youth Council, the National AIDS Council,
national television and radio stations, the Forum of Community Radio Stations, the
Media Institute of Southern Africa, the Eduardo Mondlane University, civil society
and the private sector.
43. Social policy, planning, information and monitoring. In this component, the
United Nations, in partnership with the Ministry of Planning and Development, the
Ministry of Finance, the National Institute of Statistics, and the Parliament, will
focus on policy review, monitoring and evaluation; availability and use of strategic
information on the situation of children; and the establishment of monitoring
mechanisms for child poverty. The strengthening of routine monitoring systems and
the use and dissemination of the Social, Demographic and Economic Statistics —
the national DevInfo database — will be linked to capacity development of civil
society and local government for improved planning, monitoring and evaluation.
44. Expected result: evidence-based advocacy and innovative partnerships to
strengthen a national agenda for increased resource levels for pro -poor, pro-child
growth and strategic planning.

11

45. Strategic alliances with United Nations agencies, the IMF and the World Bank
will support the Government’s increased commitment to address poverty and
vulnerability through social protection. Other partners will include the National
Statistics School, sectoral line ministries, donor groups on budget and poverty
analyses, the National Statistics Common Fund and civil society.
46. Cross-sectoral costs. Programme management and operations support will
promote effective and efficient systems, robust information and communication
technology systems, innovative advocacy initiatives in support of UNICE F
priorities, and support programme planning and monitoring, logistics and joint
operational support in the context of “Delivering as One”. Cross-sectoral costs
account for 10 per cent of planned regular resources and 4 per cent of other
resources. This is consistent with the previous programme period.
Major partnerships
47. The country programme will be managed under the leadership of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, as co-coordinator of the UNDAF Steering
Committee. Collaboration with the IMF and the World Bank and cooperating
partners will continue to grow, as will partnerships with civil society and key civil
society forums, the media, universities, traditional leaders, children and young
people and their families. UNICEF is active in SWAps to education, health, and
water and sanitation, and is a non-contributory member of the National Statistics
Common Fund and the HIV Partners Forum.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. UNDAF outcomes and outputs will be monitored through a joint monitoring
and evaluation framework, using joint review mechanisms, including a
comprehensive annual review process with Government partners, under the
leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Co -operation. Development results
groups, chaired by United Nations heads of agencies and Government partners, will
serve as the mechanism for co-ordination and monitoring of United Nations
interventions, with a comprehensive UNDAF database derived from DevInfo as a
key tool 11. Qualitative data will be gathered periodically through field visits and
evaluations, which, wherever possible, will be planned jointly by United Nations
agencies and partners.
49. A comprehensive process of analysis will begin at the outset of programme
implementation, and lead into a UNICEF midterm review in 2013, which, in turn,
will lead into an UNDAF evaluation in 2014. Earlier in the programme, a key focus
will be on the development of equity-based monitoring tools to verify results on the
evolving situation of the most vulnerable children and their families. Indicators will
correspond to the most readily available data on children, including the 2008 MICS
and the 2011 Demographic and Health Survey. Cross-sectoral considerations will be
managed through strategic working groups on equity and human rights; capacity
development; advocacy and partnerships; and HIV and AIDS. UNICEF has a key
role in the implementation of the Delivering as One Harmonized Approach to Cash
Transfers. Efforts will be made to ensure that programme delivery is supported by
__________________

The UNDAF database is a tool for joint monitoring of progress against UNDAF indicators,
using national and programme-related data to assess results achievement throughout the UNDAF
period.
11

12

efficient and effective programme management and operations. Robust information
and communication technology systems and innovative advocacy initiatives
focusing on UNICEF priorities will be promoted and support provided to
programme planning and monitoring, logistics and joint operations in the context of
“Delivering as One”.

13

