Myanmar
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Myanmar
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.11) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2010 annual session (1-4 June
2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

Basic data†
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)

16.1
98
30 a
380 b
83/84 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%)

72

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

80

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

82

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.7

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old)

—
d

GNI per capita (US$)
One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

85

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

82

†

a
b

c
d

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
WHO child growth standard.
WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank‟s developed MMR 2005 estimate, which are
adjusted for under-reporting and misclassification of maternal deaths.
http://www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.
Low income ($975 or less).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Approximately 38 per cent of Myanmar ‟s estimated population of 57.5 million
are children under 18 years of age (21.7 million). 1 Around 69 per cent of the
population live in rural areas. The recently published Fertility and Reproductive
Health Survey put the total fertility rate at 2 births per woman, indicating a possible
demographic transition. The same report also estimated the infant and under-five
mortality rates at 53 per 1,000 live births and 77 per 1,000 live births, respectively.
The absence of reliable quantitative data makes it difficult to demonstrate social and
economic progress in the country and their impact on the situation of children and
women. Nevertheless, field observation, anecdotal information and data available
from routine sources indicate an overall positive trend.
2.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimated inflation to have dropped
from 29 per cent in 2007/2008 to 3 per cent in 2009. 2 According to the IMF, the
combined investment in the health and education sectors is estimated at 1.5 per cent
of gross domestic product. Nevertheless, progress is being notic ed toward several
Millennium Development Goal targets.
__________________
1

2

2

Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development, Central Statistical Organization,
Statistical Yearbook 2008.
International Monetary Fund Article IV briefing with the United Nations and the local
diplomatic community, 17 December 2009.

3.
There is slow progress towards achieving Millennium Development Goal 1.
The 2007 report by the Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development
estimated that 32 per cent of the population lives below the poverty line of Kyat
162,136 ($162) per capita per year, 3 based on minimum food expenditure plus
reasonable expenses to meet other basic needs. This has a direct impact on the
nutritional status of children. Though recent data is lacking, the percentage of
children under five who were underweight was 31.8 per cent in 2003 (Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey [MICS] 2003) and the nationwide prevalence of severe
acute malnutrition is currently estimated at about 7 per cent. The prospect of
Myanmar achieving Goal 2 is good, with net enrolment in excess of 80 per cent
annually and gender parity index for primary education enrolment in 2005 at
1.1 annually. 4 School completion remains a concern, with a considerable number of
children dropping out without completing the primary cycle. There has been
progress in attaining Goal 4, with the under-five mortality rate at 77 per 1,000 live
births in 2007. 5 There is a need to address significant disparities in under-five
mortality between urban and rural and among different geographical regions.
4.
Data concerning Goals 5 and 6 is inadequate. The Nationwide Cause -Specific
Maternal Mortality Survey (2004-2005) reported a maternal mortality ratio of
316 per 100,000 live births, with haemorrhage identified as the ma in cause of death.
Available data shows 91 per cent of women in rural areas and 57 per cent of women
in urban areas give birth at home. Estimated HIV prevalence in the general adult
population has declined from 0.95 per cent in 2000 to 0.61 per cent in 200 9. While
general HIV knowledge has reached more than 90 per cent among young people,
comprehensive correct knowledge is 37 per cent. Access to antiretroviral drugs is
limited, estimated at 20 per cent due to inadequate resources. 6 Malaria control has
made substantive progress nationwide though the lack of resources to expand early
diagnosis and treatment remains one of the key challenges.
5.
MICS 2003 data shows the use of safe drinking water to be 80 per cent, which
suggests that Myanmar is on track in achieving that Goal 7 target. However, the
available water sources are very basic and include surface water sources that are not
considered safe for drinking in the new definition of this indictor. Therefore, it is
expected that the next MICS data will show lower safe drinking water coverage.
Sanitation coverage is reported at 82 per cent, which does not reflect the
sustainability challenges due to severe weather conditions and fatigue for frequent
replacement.
6.
Myanmar became a state party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child in
1991 and to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women in 1997. Myanmar also has a strong national legal framework to
protect children, though there are gaps to its implementation. Key legi slation
includes the Child Law (1993) and the Rules related to the Child Law (2001) and
the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Law (2005). The Government has fully embraced
the concept of child protection, which has helped to reduce children ‟s exposure to
__________________
3
4

5

6

Myanmar, Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, June 2007.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Asia and the Pacific
Education for All (EFA) Mid-Decade Assessment, Mekong sub-region Synthesis Report, 2008.
Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, Government of Myanmar, UNFPA, Country Report on 2007 Fertility
and Reproductive Health Survey.
National AIDS Programme, Annual progress report 2008.

3

harm by accelerating actions to strengthen the protective environment for children
across the country.
7.
Based on the experience of its current work in the townships, UNICEF intends
to work more closely with the state and divisional authorities to strengthen loc allevel data collection, planning, programming, monitoring and supervision. UNICEF
will provide necessary technical support to ensure greater coordination between the
state and divisional authorities and the townships.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2010
Key results achieved
8.
As a result of continued efforts through routine polio immunization and
through campaigns, Myanmar is on the verge of declaring polio -free status.
Similarly, the child morbidity and mortalit y due to measles have been significantly
brought down with sustained immunization and targeted campaigns in high -risk
areas. Myanmar has been declared as having achieved „eliminated‟ status for
maternal-neonatal tetanus and is on the verge of being declared iodine deficiency
disorder-free. An initial assessment for declaring Myanmar to be free from maternal
neonatal tetanus is ongoing. An estimated 60 per cent of pregnant women currently
receive iron-folate supplementation regularly, and intensified measur es are in place
to supplement vitamin B1 to pregnant and lactating women. Improved hygiene and
sanitation has led to a continuous decline in the fatality rates of waterborne diseases
such as diarrhoea in children under five years. The risk of HIV transmiss ion from
mother-to-child has been brought down to 6.7 per cent in a sample survey, 7 and
prevention of mother-to-child-transmission (PMTCT) services have been scaled up
to more than half of the country. Access to antenatal care has also gone up to 91 per
cent in nearly 50 per cent of all townships with UNICEF support, and the
Government has begun preventing maternal deaths from haemorrhage through
administration of misoprostol by midwives in community settings.
9.
The Ministry of Education adopted a child-friendly school approach as a
national strategy to improve the quality of education. The initiative is fully
operational in 25 out of 324 townships in Myanmar. A standard guideline for high quality early childhood development has been approved, although cove rage of the
early childhood development programme is still low. Life -skills and HIV education,
introduced in three townships in 2005, has been adopted nationally as part of the
primary school curricula, and is covering all 40,000 primary schools as of end 2009.
10. Minimum standards on care, such as the protection of children in residential
care and of working children, have been developed in partnership with relevant
Ministries. Once issued as directives, these standards could provide an additional
protective framework. Two separate juvenile courts were established in Yangon and
Mandalay to try juvenile cases in 20 townships in Yangon City Development Area
and 5 townships in Mandalay City Development Area. Bilateral memoranda of
understanding have been signed by the Government with the People‟s Republic of
China and Thailand in combating human trafficking. A UN Country Team
__________________
7

4

In absence of interventions, 25 per cent to 30 per cent of infants born to HIV-positive mothers
are infected with HIV.

monitoring and reporting mechanism on children affected by armed conflict has
been operational since June 2007 and is in regular contact with the relevant
government departments on prevention of recruitment of minors. Thus far twelve
training sessions have been conducted on international humanitarian law and
Myanmar child law for military officers. UNICEF and NGO partners have assisted
in reintegration of more than 300 children released, including those released under
ILO‟s forced labour mechanism. Discussions are underway towards signing of a
national action plan. In collaboration with the Department of Social Welfare,
UNICEF took a leadership role in establishing an Inter-Agency Working Group for
Social Protection of Children, which provides a platform for discussing issues and
strategies for reducing socio-economic vulnerabilities and risks to children and their
families.
11. UNICEF emergency response to Cyclone Nargis and the continuing recovery
efforts were deemed appropriate and relevant. 8 UNICEF contributed substantially to
the restoration of basic health services; assisted in the provision of safe drinking
water to the affected population; and supported large-scale use of disinfectants.
While it is not possible to quantify the number of lives saved and diseases averted,
these efforts clearly helped to prevent disease outbreaks related to water, sanitation
and personal hygiene. Hundreds of safe learning spaces were provided and damaged
schools repaired. As a result, the new school year resumed on time in the first week
of June 2008, with 82 per cent enrolment, a figure that reached 90 per cent in 2009,
according to data collected in household surveys. UNICEF assisted in the
establishment of „child-friendly spaces‟ soon after the cyclone struck in 2008,
providing a venue for nearly 1,600 orphans and separated children, whom
subsequently were reunited with their biological parents or close relatives.
12. As part of early recovery, UNICEF continued to repair schools and rural health
centres in the nine townships most affected by Cyclone Nargis. Collaboration with
non-governmental organizations on health and nutrition helped to re -establish
essential maternal and child health services and also to prevent severe acute
malnutrition in the affected townships. Drawing on the recent experience in relief
and recovery, UNICEF is currently working with the Ministry of Social Welfare,
Relief and Resettlement and the Myanmar Red Cross Society on strengthening
capacity in disaster preparedness and management.
Lessons learned
13. Essential learning packages for primary school children were introduced in
25 townships to reduce indirect cost of schooling for parents, which indirectly also
had a positive impact on attendance and retention. UNICEF will assess the impact
on learning achievements as a result of this intervention in 2010 and compare the
findings with the 2007 baseline.
14. The microplanning strategy using community participation was found to be
effective in identifying high-risk geographic locations, enabling the distribution of
insecticide-treated mosquito nets to targeted families instead of universal
distribution. This minimized unit cost coverage and maximized community

__________________
8

UNICEF Myanmar, “Best practices and lessons learnt: UNICEF Myanmar ‟s response following
cyclone Nargis”, April 2009.

5

awareness and motivation for prevention and control. This planning method has
broader application for other targeted interventions.
15. In the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis, UNICEF assumed cluster leadership in the
humanitarian community for nutrition, education, child protection, and water and
environmental sanitation. While the overall experience in implementing the cluster
approach has been positive, there is a need to strengthen cluster leadership capacity
in-house to effectively respond in the field. The cluster mechanism worked well
during the relief operation, but coordination with all humanitarian partners, at times
competing, requires great effort. When the relief phase moves into the early
recovery phase, the role of clusters must be revised accordingly.
16. The comprehensive database on mapping naturally occurring arsenic
contamination in more than 230,000 groundwater sources has created good
awareness and local ownership, and is instrumental for advocating the developme nt
of an arsenic mitigation strategy. The dissemination of the arsenic data and related
maps to the authorities in 30 out of 62 affected townships allowed authorities to
regulate drilling of tube wells and provide information on arsenic -related health
hazards to affected communities. This experience will be used to design and develop
policy on water safety.

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Young child survival and
development
Water, sanitation and hygiene
Basic education and gender
equality
HIV/AIDS and children
Child protection
Social policy advocacy and
monitoring and evaluation
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

27 000
10 000

36 000
16 000

63 000
26 000

13 500
5 500
10 585

31 000
6 000
11 000

44 500
11 500
21 585

5 000
12 000

7 000
8 000

12 000
20 000

83 585

115 000

198 585

Note: The budget does not include emergency funds.

Preparation process
17. UNICEF and technical staff from line ministries formed a technical working
group to review and recommend programme components outlined in a series of
workshops, in 2009. The team took into account recommendations of the concluding
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on Myanmar‟s periodic
report. In-house workshops were held for programme and operations teams on
planning and programming, results-based management, a human rights-based
approach to programming and strategic visioning. The team also incorporated the

6

recommendations from the midterm review of the 2006−2010 country programme,
chaired by the Minister for National Planning and Economic Development. The
draft country programme document was discussed with the Ministry of National
Planning and Economic Development, all partner Ministries and relevant donor
partners. This draft was then subjected to a peer review organized by the Regional
Office, which assisted in refining the document and the accompanying results
matrix, following the new guidelines in defining programme component results and
intermediate results.
Programme components results and strategies
18. The overall goal of the 2011−2015 country programme is to contribute to the
progressive realization of the rights of the child to survival, development, protection
and participation, with emphasis on vulnerable children and aiming to reduce
disparities. The country programme will contribute to the achievement of Goals 2,
4 and 6, and the Millennium Declaration. By 2015, the programme will have
contributed to the following strategic results: (a) reducing the under -five child
mortality rate of 130 in 1990 to 43 per 1,000 live births; (b) reducing the infant
mortality rate from 91 in 1990 to 35 per 1,000 live births; (c) reducing the neonatal
mortality rate to 16 per 1,000 live births; (d) increasing the net enrolment to 90 per
cent and completion of primary education to 80 per cent; and (d) promoting and
enhancing a protective environment for all children from violence, exploitation,
neglect and abuse.
19. Building on progress made and lessons learned from the previous country
programme, the overarching programme strategy focuses on helping vulnerable
children in the most disadvantaged townships, aiming at disparity reduction.
UNICEF will focus on systems building and strengthening, and promote planning
and programming at state and division levels for sustai nability and local-level
capacity enhancement. At the national level, UNICEF will support the formulation
and strengthening of policies and strategies to implement national programmes, such
as immunization and deworming, as well as vitamin A and other micr onutrient
supplementation. In selected townships with poor indicators for children, sectoral
programmes will converge to achieve greater impact and allow for innovation and
modelling that could be replicated and scaled up.
20. The programme will be guided by the following interrelated strategies:
(a) providing technical assistance and support to improve knowledge management
and the generation, use and dissemination of child -focused information to contribute
to policy development, programme design and budget allocation; (b) strengthening
the system for service delivery in selected townships, with active state/division level involvement, emphasizing effective implementation and synergy between
programme components and enhancing the capacity of service -providers to sustain
results achieved; (c) partnering with communities, the mass media and
non-governmental organizations to accelerate behavioural change, using a mix of
communication strategies and approaches on child care practices and protection in
selected townships; (d) continuing mainstreaming emergency preparedness and
response through the programme components to address humanitarian needs;
(e) paying greater attention to gender analysis and collection of disaggregated data,
aiming to reduce gender disparities; (f) enhancing partnerships‟ and networks‟
capacities to advocate, mobilize and participate in meaningful policy dialogue,
service delivery, emergency preparedness and response and to leverage resources;
(g) applying results-based planning, monitoring and evaluation, giving special

7

attention to monitoring of the Goals; and (h) developing joint programmes with
United Nations agencies, where feasible, to maximize results.
21. The field presence of UNICEF in various locations will facilitate coordination
with state, division and township authorities to support local -level planning and
results-based advocacy to facilitate programme implementation, particularly by
sharing good practices and addressing bottlenecks.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
22. The UNICEF country programme contributes directly to the Government ‟s
national priorities, sectoral policies and plans, such as the Myanmar National Action
Plan for Children 2006−2015, the Myanmar 30-Year Long-Term Education
Development Plan (2001−2030), the Myanmar National Child Health Strategy
(2010−2014), the Strategic Plan for Water Supply (2001−2010), Sanitation and
Hygiene in Myanmar (2007−2011) and the Myanmar Millennium Development
Goals Report.
23. Myanmar does not have a Common Country Assessment or a United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). However, the United Nations
country team has a strategic framework, which guides the United Nations support to
the development efforts of Myanmar. The framework summarizes the United
Nations commitments to Myanmar in relation to national and international
priorities.
Relationship to international priorities
24. Myanmar is a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The
country programme is guided by these Conventions, the Millennium Declaration and
the Millennium Development Goals, as well as other international and regional
commitments. The proposed programme components will contribute to these
international priorities, which are in tandem with all five focus are as of the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan.
Programme components
25. Young child survival and development. The programme will sustain and
scale up high-impact interventions to further reduce major preventable and treatable
causes of under-five mortality and morbidity, with a special focus on hard-to-reach
areas. It will operate within the framework of the government -led health and
nutrition programme. UNICEF aims to (a) strengthen planning, implementation and
supervision capacity at the national, state, division and township levels and (b) to
improve service delivery. This includes ensuring the availability of essential
medicines and commodities; providing technical assistance and advocacy for better
planning and programming; and promoting policy dialogue and development of
policies and strategies to reduce disparity. The programme will advocate, leverage
resources and provide technical advice for the expanded nationwide programme for
immunization, vitamin A and other micronutrient supplementation, as we ll as
deworming. UNICEF will contribute to the following programme results
components: (a) improve child and maternal nutrition by promoting appropriate
infant and young child feeding practices, micronutrient supplementation and
treatment of severe acute malnutrition; (b) increase coverage and quality of

8

preventive and curative services and appropriate key family care practices for
childhood diseases; (b) develop relevant guidelines and policies for maternal and
child health and increase coverage of quality maternal and newborn interventions at
facility and community levels in selected townships.
26. Water, environmental sanitation and hygiene. The programme will focus on
disparity reduction by targeting hard-to-reach areas where access to safe water
sources is limited. The experience of mapping naturally occurring arsenic
contamination in groundwater will be expanded to address other water quality
parameters that are potentially hazardous to public health. Further deliberations will
be pursued on the proposed national drinking water standard and the development of
school water and sanitation guidelines. Similarly, promotion of water treatment at
the household level, using affordable technologies suitable to local conditions, will
be continued to achieve the anticipated health goals. As part of the child-friendly
school initiative, UNICEF will continue the expansion of water and sanitation
networks in schools that are currently without such facilities. This programme
component is in compliance with the Governme nt‟s efforts to improve the water and
sanitation infrastructure and to reduce diseases related to unsafe water and
sanitation, especially diarrhoea. 9 Expected programme component results by 2015
are the following: (a) reduce water- and excreta-related diseases caused by polluted
water and poor hygienic conditions, especially diarrhoea in under-five children in
the targeted areas, through hygiene improvement and by closing the access gap to
safe and sustainable water supply and sanitation services; (b) estab lish and
implement supportive policies and legislative frameworks, such as the national
drinking water standard and a sound school water and sanitation strategy.
27. Basic education and gender equality. The programme will assist the Ministry
of Education in further improving the current net enrolment of over 80 per cent,
with gender parity, and in increasing retention and completion of primary education
to achieve Goal 2. It aims to progressively enable children aged 3−5 years to access
quality early learning, stimulation and preparation for timely enrolment in primary
school. It also aims to enable children aged 5−9 years to access and complete
quality primary education and achieve the required proficiency levels. The
intervention will be coupled with early childhood development and life skills as well
as adolescent participation activities. The programme will consolidate and expand
current initiatives, such as the child-friendly school initiative. UNICEF will partner
with teacher training colleges to mainstream the child-friendly school concept for
quality improvement through effective teaching-learning processes. UNICEF will
expand management information systems for township - and school-based education
to promote evidence-based policy consultation and advocacy, in line with the
Government‟s 30-year Education Plan. The main programme strategy aims at
reducing disparities in access to quality basic education and increase school
completion rates in the primary education cycle. UNICEF will contribute to the
following programme component results by 2015: (a) enhance government capacity
at national and subnational levels to increase access to basic education with reduced
disparities in early childhood and primary schools; (b) support the Government in
improving the quality of primary schools nationally, through the child -friendly
school initiative; (c) enable nationally adolescents, whether they are in or out of
__________________
9

Department of Development Affairs, 10-Year Clean Water Supply Plan in Rural Regions.

9

school, to have access to life-skills education, to reduce risks and vulnerabilities,
including HIV/AIDS.
28. HIV and children. The programme seeks to control the spread of HIV and
reduce its impact among the general population, whose current prevalence is
estimated at 0.61 per cent. UNICEF is supporting the Government in expanding
services for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV by increasing
access to voluntary HIV counselling and testing of pregnant women, and providing
nevirapine to reduce HIV transmission in children. These services are now available
in 170 out of 325 townships. Further controlling the spread of HIV and minimizing
its impact can be achieved by „de-medicalizing‟ HIV response through an enhanced
family-centred approach, social support services, greater protective measures and by
expanding partnerships with various government departments and communities.
UNICEF will contribute to the following programme component results by 2015:
(a) strengthened capacity and response of various sectors at all levels on the
prevention of HIV among children and women, to further reduce paediat ric HIV
infection; (b) strategy and standards for prevention, care, support and protection for
children infected with and affected by HIV/AIDS developed and implemented, and
documented in the national strategic plan.
29. Child protection. The programme will support the Government‟s efforts to
reduce children‟s exposure and vulnerability to violence, abuse and exploitation in
80 per cent of identified at-risk and marginalized children. It will strengthen its
efforts on advocacy for planning, policy development and budgeting, as well as
providing support for appropriate inter-ministerial and interdepartmental
arrangements for adequate child protection. The programme will seek to promote
and strengthen integrated child-friendly services, at the state, division, township and
community levels, and continue to make improvements in the juvenile justice
system, as well as combat human trafficking and expand the protection of children.
It will also seek to ensure that child protection programmes and policies are
enhanced by improved data collection and analysis on the situation of children.
UNICEF will contribute to the following programme component results by 2015:
(a) a developed and operational national child protection and social welfare policy,
in line with Myanmar Child Law; (b) support for a national child protection system
through an improved coordination and referral mechanism among social welfare,
health, education and justice sectors, and civil society organizations; (c) enhanced
capacity of government officials, civil society organizations and communities to
implement prevention, recovery and reintegration services for vulnerable children to
strengthen child protection and the social welfare system, including improved data
collection and use; (c) full implementation of national and international standards to
prevent and respond to grave violations against children as per United Nations
Security Council resolutions 1612 and 1882.
30. Social policy advocacy, monitoring and evaluation. The programme will
support evidence-based social policy formulation and advocacy for children‟s rights
by mainstreaming social policy and social protection strategies at institutional and
national levels. It will provide technical assistance to the counterpart departments in
conducting thematic analyses, studies, and policy reviews on topical areas, with a
view to refining and updating policies and strategies for improved outcomes for
children. The programme will also support knowledge management related to social
policies and social protection strategies for children and women by strengthening
relevant networks with a wide range of stakeholders, including the Government,

10

academic institutions, civil society organizations and the media. Expected
programme component results by 2015 are the following: national social policies
and strategies are developed and protection systems introduced to mitigate
vulnerabilities and reduce disparities at national and townships levels. These results
will be based on improved collection and utilization of reliable and disaggregated
data for policy advocacy and planning.
31. Programme communication and information will support the country
programme goals and the Millennium Development Goals by making strategic
communication inputs towards advocacy and behaviour change communication, in
part by increasing awareness on children‟s rights through the media and other
external relations. Communication activities promoting and engaging child
participation also aim to bring greater visibility to children ‟s issues and to help raise
resources for children in Myanmar. Costing of programme communication activities
are covered under respective programme components.
32. Cross-sectoral costs will cover the management and support of the overall
country programme, including programme planning, coordination and field
monitoring. It will also cover staff costs and operating expenses related to supply,
logistics, administration and finance.
Major partnerships
33. Myanmar receives only limited external assistance, directly or indirectly
through bilateral or multilateral agencies. A multi-donor trust fund has been
established for livelihood and health, to be accessed by non-governmental
organizations. Four member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development and the European Union have been funding a large
quality basic education programme, implemented by UNICEF since 2007. UNICEF
works on the ground for programme implementation directly through the
government departments and through a number of international and local nongovernmental organizations and faith-based organizations. UNICEF will strengthen
its partnership with the World Food Programme, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, World Health Organization, International Labour
Organisation, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations
Educational, Social and Cultural Organisation, United Nations Population Fund, and
local and international non-governmental organizations in areas of common interest
such as child health, basic education and child vulnerability. Joint programming
with United Nations agencies in monitoring, reproductive health and education will
be promoted.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
34. The Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development is the
coordinating body for overall programme implementation and signs the UNICEF
Country Programme Action Plan. A five-year integrated monitoring and evaluation
plan will guide the country management team on results-based management and the
planning of major research, studies, surveys and evaluations in a comprehensive
way. DevInfo will contribute to the decision-making process related to the situation
of children within the broader context of the Goals. The summary results matrix
highlights expected programme component results as well as key progress indicators
to be used for monitoring and evaluating programme performance. Results of MICS

11

2009/2010 and the National Household Survey 2009/2010 will be used as baseline
data, and specific surveys will be undertaken to monitor progress of programme
component key results, as required. It is hoped that there will be increased
opportunities for broadening partnerships with local authorities in ceasefire areas to
address the acute needs of Myanmar children everywhere in the country.

12

