Nepal
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Nepal
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.12) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate & severe)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2008)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2010-2011)

12.9
50
29 a
17/30, ../..
380 b
67/70 c,d

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2007)

62

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

89

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

31

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years of age, male/female, 2009)

0.4

Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female, 2008)

34 e

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

35
36/34, 42/34, 22/47
490

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

82

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

86

†

a
b

c
d
e

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
280 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 1999-2005 estimate developed by the Maternal
Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank,
together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification
of maternal deaths. Comparable time series on maternal mortality ratios for the years 1990,
1995, 2000, 2005 and 2008 are available at www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.
Does not include primary school aged children attending secondary school.
Data differs from the standard definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Nepal is a landlocked country with diverse ecology and culture. Half of its
26.6 million people live in the low-lying southern terai plains, followed by 43 per
cent in the middle Hills and 7 per cent in the northern Mountains. 1 The population
can be divided into the Hindu castes (57.5 per cent), Janajati (37.2 per cent), and
Muslim/other minorities (4.3 per cent). Forty-eight per cent of the population is
under 18 years of age, making investments in children and adolescents especially
relevant in shaping national development.
2.
Nepal has made rapid progress, as measured by the Human Development
Index — from 0.210 (1970) to 0.428 (2010) — despite a violent conflict
__________________
1

2

Unless specifically cited, data sources include: the Committee on the Rights of the Child 2005;
the Nepal Demographic Health Survey 2006 and 2011; United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Reports 2010 and 2011; the National Living Standards Survey 2011; Human
Rights Council 2011; Nepal United Nations Country Team Country Analysis 2011; various
UNICEF Nepal reports; and various Ministry and non-governmental organization reports.

(1996-2006). Legislation and initiatives promoting free education have raised net
enrolment rates. Extension of primary health care has lowered the under -five
mortality rate (U5MR) and the infant mortality rate. Nepal received the 2010
Millennium Development Goal Award for reducing its maternal mortality ratio and
will likely achieve all three micronutrient goals of A World Fit for Children.
3.
Nevertheless, Nepal ranks 157 out of 187 countries in the 2011 Human
Development Index. While overall poverty is decreasing, two thirds of its children
are still deprived of at least one of seven basic needs. The national Gini coefficient
(0.352) is amongst Asia’s highest. Nepal’s Human Development Index would be a
third higher than its present level had past progress been distributed evenly across
society. Inequity is especially evident in terms of geography, age, gender, caste,
ethnicity, language, education, HIV status, disability, and income. Three
interdependent sets of factors underpin this inequity: “political”, including inadequate
governance, policy, legislation, and investment; “system”, including fragmented,
inaccessible and low-quality social services; and “societal”, including harmful social
norms and practices that impact access to and use of services or fuel discrimination
and deprivation.
4.
Political factors. Following the Monarchy’s abolition in 2008, political
transformation towards an inclusive Constitution with a federal structure remains
unstable. 2 Governance challenges, including strikes and violent acts orchestrated by
politically affiliated groups, hinder progress particularly in the terai. Subnational
bodies have operated without elected representatives for 10 years, resulting in
interference in local administration and increased fiduciary risks. Nepal ranks 154 out
of 182 countries in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index 2011.
5.
Policies and national plans of action for children exist but lack budgets and
coordination. Several pending pieces of legislation have significant gaps with regard
to children’s rights. Delay in enacting key legislation impedes reform. Commissions
to address rights violations exist but have insufficient resources and limited public
access. Nutrition, early childhood development, HIV prevention, water, sanitation
and hygiene education (WASH), adolescent development, and child protection
remain underfunded.
6.
An average of 1,000 lives and $43 million are lost annually to earthquakes,
floods, landslides, and droughts (United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction, 2011). Water- and drought-induced disasters are intensifying due to
increased floods, melting glaciers, and shifting seasons. More investment is needed
to prepare for and to mitigate the impact of natural hazards and climate change.
7.
System factors. Eighty per cent of the wealthiest quintile has access to a
health facility within 30 minutes’ walk, but only 50 per cent of the poorest quintile
has such access. Thirty-six per cent of births are attended by a skilled health worker;
in the two lowest wealth quintiles skilled birth attendance is 18 per cent. The
poorest children are 24 times less likely to use improved sanitation facilities
compared to the richest. Over 40 per cent of improved drinking water sources need
major rehabilitation. Only 35 per cent of births are registered; the figure is 22 per
cent among the poorest. In 2010, only 11 per cent of pregnant women tested for HIV
__________________
2

The country is currently administered through 5 Development Regions, 75 Districts, 99
Municipalities, and 3,734 Village Development Committees (VDCs).

3

received their results, while 7 per cent of pregnant women who were HIV positive and
32 per cent of the children who were HIV positive rec eived antiretroviral treatment.
8.
Twenty-two per cent of children do not enrol in primary school. These children
are largely from disadvantaged groups or living in districts with low access to
education. One per cent of children with disabilities go to p rimary school. The
quality of the public education system is a concern. In 2011, only 45 per cent of
grade 10 students from public/community schools passed the School Leaving
Certificate. Unemployment rates are increasing for every age cohort of young
people. Many take on insecure, hazardous jobs. Young women often experience
imposed economic inactivity or are forced into subsistence activities.
9.
Most child protection services are provided by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), largely funded by development partners. Services are fragmented, vary in
quality with little State oversight, and generally focus on rescue and rehabilitation
rather than prevention. To advance justice for children, specialized police services
exist in every district and dedicated courts exist in 32 districts, but their capacity to
deal with child victims, witnesses and offenders is weak. Child protection data are
limited.
10. Societal factors. Harmful social norms and practices regarding children and
adolescents prevail, most notably child labour, gender-based and sexual violence,
trafficking, child marriage, violent discipline, and discrimination, for example,
against third genders. Approximately 620,000 children aged 5 -17 years are engaged
in hazardous work. Some 13,000 girls are being sexually exploited in the
Kathmandu Valley. In the Mid- and Far-Western Regions, 66 per cent of the poorest
girls are married before the age of 18 years, while 9 per cent of all girls are married
before the age of 14 years. In the same regions, 83 per cent of children aged 2-14
experience violent discipline, and one in every two girls encounters some form of
discrimination during menstruation.
11. New poverty traps are emerging. The urban population has increased from
14 per cent (2001) to 17 per cent (2011). Urban centres are unable to accommodate
such growth. U5MR among the poorest urban quintile is higher than the average
rural U5MR. Limited economic opportunity has increased internal and overseas
migration, especially among men, in turn dismantling household structures,
overburdening girls and women, and increasing the risks of HIV infection and
engagement in hazardous work.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
12. The following are key results, with further information provided in the
consolidated results report:
(a) Equity-based investments in maternal, neonatal and child health have
been influenced by demonstrating field-based packages in remote areas and targeting
poor-performing districts in nationwide programmes such as immunization. A Child
Grant to improve nutrition was initiated for poor Dalit families with child ren
under 5 and all families in five Karnali districts. Birth registration is included in the
scheme, with some localities achieving universal registration;

4

(b) UNICEF assisted in both the design and fund -raising for the Ministry of
Education 2009-2014 School Sector Reform Plan. The Ministry was assisted in the
development of the Child-friendly School Framework and Minimum Standards for
Quality Education. Education Emergency Cluster capacity has been strengthened and
was effectively mobilized during the September 2011 Eastern Region earthquake
response;
(c) UNICEF support for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission
(PMTCT) of HIV has helped to reduce transmission from 17 per cent (2010) to 8 per
cent (2011), with particular success demonstrated through community -based PMTCT
services;
(d) Over 10,000 children associated with or affected by the conflict,
scattered across 60 districts, were successfully integrated, and a basic system for
their protection was established with potential to address a broader range of child
protection issues. The system was strengthened through the expansion, from 23 to
59 districts, of Paralegal Committees — a community-based mechanism to combat
trafficking of girls and women, gender-based violence, and the abuse, exploitation
of and violence against children;
(e) UNICEF assisted some of the most marginalized communities throu gh its
rights-based Decentralized Action for Children and Women (DACAW) approach.
Learning from DACAW, UNICEF assisted the Ministry of Local Development to
develop a Child-Friendly Local Governance (CFLG) strategy, endorsed by Cabinet
in 2011. CFLG facilitates prioritization of children’s rights in planning and budgeting.
The roll-out of CFLG is well under way in 34 districts and 14 municipalities.
Enhancing CFLG’s expansion, 13,291 child clubs (over 5,000 initiated with
UNICEF support) are now active in 52 districts;
(f) UNICEF support in WASH has resulted in greater sector harmonization,
demonstrated by, for example, the first National Hygiene and Sanitation Master Plan
and the first large-scale public-private-partnership to promote hand-washing with
soap. A social movement has been initiated in the Mid- and Far-Western Regions
accelerating installation of latrines in schools and local communities. UNICEF has
also built WASH Emergency Cluster capacity at national and subnational levels.
Lessons learned
13. Sector-wide approaches (SWAps) have enhanced coordination within sectors
but intersectoral collaboration, especially at subnational level, requires strong
investment. Most of the children, adolescents and women being left out of Nepal’s
progress are denied many of the same rights simultaneously. These deprivations
diminish their potential to reach full capacity as adults, resulting in the transfer of
the same deprivations to the next generation. DACAW demonstrated that to address
multiple disparities, integrated systems are needed that bind together different
programmatic interventions in a coherent, mutually reinforcing manner. Concurrently,
policy formulation and implementation across development sectors need to be
coordinated to ensure all dimensions of inequity are addressed comprehensively. For
example, HIV and AIDS prevention is best implemented as a multi -sector approach
and mainstreamed in health, nutrition, protection, education and social policy. The
roll-out of CFLG offers tremendous opportunity to build capacity for child-centred
integrated policy, planning, budgeting and monitoring.

5

14. The rapid expansion of early childhood development centres, child clubs, and
other structures originating from DACAW has sometimes come at the cost of
sustainability and quality. Sustainability is enhanced when interventions are embedded
into permanent structures (e.g., the integration of PMTCT into maternal and child
health services) and when support is channelled through national systems (e.g.,
supporting District Education Plans rather than individual schools). All local and
national child rights initiatives benefit from clear monitoring of quality standards.
15. There is global and local evidence that investing in adolescent girls can break
the cycle of inter-generational poverty. Important experience has been gained on
adolescent development and participation through initiatives such as HIV
prevention, CFLG, alternative schooling, and rehabilitating children associated with
the armed conflict. Given the many challenges confronting young people, UNICEF
must intensify its focus on adolescents, including their need for civic engagement
and sustainable socio-economic integration.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

15 137

13 830

28 967

5 605

64 277

69 882

PCR 1 Policies reformed
PCR 2 Social sector systems strengthened
PCR 3 Social norms and behaviour changed

2 005

24 329

26 334

Cross-sectoral

11 413

7 516

18 929

Total

34 160

109 952

144 112

Preparation process
16. In 2011, a committee co-chaired by the National Planning Commission and the
United Nations guided the design of the 2013-2017 United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The country analysis focused on the most
vulnerable groups, exploring the root causes for their vulnerability. Eleven UNDAF
outcomes were agreed upon at a participatory strategic planning retreat. Augmenting
the country analysis, UNICEF conducted an equity-focused, rights-based situation
analysis of children, adolescents and women involving consultations with key
stakeholders including children and adolescents. The Government, together with
development partners, endorsed the country programme document in February 2012.
An initial screening indicated no environmental impact was anticipated as a result of
UNICEF interventions.
Programme components, results and strategies
17. The overall goal of the 2013-2017 country programme is to directly address
the three main sets of inequity factors (political, system, societal) so that all
children, adolescents and women have access to education, health care, nutrition,
sanitation, clean water, protection, information, and other servi ces necessary to
fulfil their rights to survival, development, protection and participation.

6

18. Contributing to the overall goal, the following three inter -related programme
component results (PCRs), measured through qualitative and quantitative indicato rs
and targets, are expected by the end of 2017:
(a) PCR 1: National policies, legislation, plans, budgets, coordination and
monitoring mechanisms are enabling the survival, development, protection and
participation rights of children, adolescents, and women, to be fulfilled with equity
in all contexts, including humanitarian situations;
(b) PCR 2: In selected areas (the most disadvantaged districts and
municipalities), social sector systems are providing integrated, quality services to
fulfil the survival, development, protection and participation rights of children,
adolescents and women with equity in all contexts, including humanitarian situations;
(c) PCR 3: In selected areas, children, adolescents, women and men, and all
relevant duty-bearers are engaged in social change and action to realize the survival,
development, protection and participation rights of children, adolescents and women
with equity in all contexts, including humanitarian situations.
19. PCR 1 reflects intensive policy reform work in the context of preparations for
a new Constitution and state restructuring towards federalism, and will build on
efforts to support legislation and multi-sector policies that meet international human
rights standards. The latter two PCRs will prioritize at least 15 districts (and their
municipalities) considered to be the most disadvantaged through a newly designed
Child Deprivation Index described in the summary results matrix. Another set of
disadvantaged districts and municipalities will be supported through selective
programming within PCRs 2 and 3. Evidence of subnational impact will be fed back
into national policy reform (PCR 1).
20. Programmes will be coordinated through matrix management, since all
contribute to the three PCRs in respective ways. Significant risks have been
considered in developing the planned results and in selecting strategies. The
following strategies will be operationalized:
(a) Capacity development. Capacities of children, adolescents, women,
community leaders and networks, non-government and government staff will be
further strengthened at subnational and national levels to improve the quality, reach,
coordination, monitoring and use of social service systems and to strengthen policy
design, implementation and review. Key-capacity building initiatives delivered
through coordinated efforts among United Nations partners will include HIV
mainstreaming, promotion of gender equality, and engagement in conflict -sensitive
programming. Close attention will be paid to additional capacity-building that will
be required under federal restructuring;
(b) Effective advocacy. UNICEF advocacy will contribute to equity-focused
social policies, in addition to influencing SWAps, preparation of the Constitution
and other legislation, planning, and budgeting in favour of children, adolescents and
women. Advocacy will be enhanced through new data generation, especially on
adolescent girls and urban children, as well as by using bottleneck analysis and real time monitoring of various determinants of inequity;
(c) Strategic partnerships. UNICEF will continue to work closely with
government at all levels and complement this by convening partners from the United

7

Nations system, bilateral and multilateral organizations, civil society, academia,
media and the private sector;
(d) Knowledge management. Government and UNICEF knowledge systems
will be strengthened to influence policy and programme management. Exchange of
innovations and lessons learned will be continued across Nepal’s regions as well as
through the membership of Nepal in the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation and global exchanges, including South-South cooperation;
(e) Communication for Development. UNICEF will remain a pioneer in the
creative use of Communication for Development in support of programmes using
community resources, films, cartoons, radio, television, entertainment, education,
interpersonal communication, and information communication technology, including
Short Message Service (SMS), Twitter and Facebook;
(f) Urbanization, disaster risk reduction, and climate change. While
primacy will continue to be given to the most disadvantaged groups living in rural
areas, attention will also be paid to urban inequity issues, particularly urban child
survival, adolescent development, WASH, and protection. There will be stronger
engagement in disaster risk management rather than just emergency preparedness.
The country office has mapped child-centred disaster risks to prioritize districts and
municipalities, and will, to the extent possible, risk-proof investments in relation to
climate change and disaster-risk through strengthening government policy and
community knowledge on climate change.
21. Health and nutrition programme. The programme component will work with
the Ministry of Health and Population and SWAp partners to revise the National
Health Policy as well as specific policies, laws, and plans related to immunization,
skilled birth attendants, human resources, safe motherhood and neonatal care so that
equity gaps and bottlenecks are addressed. The National Planning Commission and
key partners will be supported to roll out a multi-sectoral nutrition plan with a focus
on delivering core essential nutrition services at scale during the first 1,000 days of
children’s lives. The capacity of health staff in the most disadvantaged districts and
municipalities will be strengthened to provide quality and equitable primary health
services focused on the maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health continuum
of care. Stronger attention will be given to neonatal care, given that most (61 per
cent) under-five deaths occur in the first month of life — many within 24 hours of
birth — as well as to achieving the elimination of new HIV infection among
children and to keeping alive the mothers of children infected by HIV. In the same
geographic areas, support will be provided to increasing access to and utilization of
essential micronutrients by vulnerable groups. Intensive Communication for
Development will be used to mobilize individuals, parents, care-givers, families and
communities to take informed action to improve the maternal, newborn, child and
adolescent health and HIV prevention and care. Likewise, parents, caregivers and
families will be encouraged to practice optimal maternal, infant and young child
feeding and to manage acute malnutrition.
22. Education. The programme component will work with the Ministry of
Education and SWAp partners to analyse system data, sector evaluations, and
feedback from schools and districts to promote greater gender and social equity in
national education policies, strategies and budgets. In targeted districts and
municipalities, support will be given to increasing young children’s access to
holistic developmental opportunities through parental education and child-friendly

8

pre-primary education for improved school readiness. Local education authorities
will be supported to ensure children, particularly girls and marginalized children,
have increased access to and complete uninterrupted child-friendly, quality basic
and secondary education. The WASH programme will continue to work with the
Ministry of Education to support the construction of WASH facilities in schools that
are child-friendly, particularly in terms of gender and children with disabilities, in
the targeted areas. Working closely with the adolescent development and participation
(ADAP) programme, efforts will be made to mobilize families, communities and
service providers to ensure that out-of-school children and adolescents have
increased access to and complete quality alternative -learning opportunities.
23. Child protection programme. The programme component will assist in the
progressive development of a national multi-sector child protection system,
including legislation, policies, standards, planning and resourcing, monitoring and
documentation, coordination and collaboration at national and local levels. In
targeted districts and municipalities, the focus will be on ensuring that children and
adolescents at risk or victims of abuse or exploitation — including children affected
by conflict and by AIDS — benefit from quality social welfare services through
capacity-building of service providers, strengthening multi-sector coordination and
collaboration, and improving data availability and the monitoring of standards. At
the same time, the capacities of the police and judiciary will be strengthened to help
to ensure that children and adolescents who are victims of or witnesses to crime, or
offenders, have access to child-sensitive justice. Linkages between Paralegal
Committees and the formal justice system and other social services will be
enhanced. Communication for Development initiatives will be implemented to help
children, families, and communities take action to protect chil dren and adolescents
who are at risk or victims of abuse, violence and exploitation.
24. Water, sanitation and hygiene. The programme component will work with
the Ministry of Physical Planning and Works and partners to formulate and review a
national programme and finance strategy to improve equitable public access to
WASH and the sustainability and efficiency of the WASH sector. In targeted districts
and municipalities, the capacities of vulnerable communities (with a particular focus
on school communities) will be strengthened to utilize and participate in the
management of safe and sustainable drinking water and sanitation facilities. The
intensive Communication for Development initiatives promoting maternal, newborn,
infant, child and adolescent health, and HIV prevention and care, will include a
strong focus on behaviours related to safe water use, hygiene (including hand
washing with soap and menstrual hygiene for adolescent girls), and sanitation.
25. Adolescent development and participation. The new programme component
will aim to ensure the systematic, ethical, meaningful and regular participation of
adolescents at critical levels to make national policies, plans, and budgets
adolescent-sensitive. ADAP will make special efforts to build capacities o f
disadvantaged and marginalized adolescents, especially girls, to make sure their
voices are heard and their concerns addressed. Integrated services in targeted
districts and municipalities will be made more adolescent -friendly. Adolescent girls
and boys will be equipped with knowledge and life skills to enhance their
opportunities to pursue livelihoods as well as civic engagement. ADAP will take the
lead in capacitating family, community and subnational level duty -bearers including
the media, employers, government staff, religious organizations, and local political

9

leaders to address harmful and discriminatory social norms and practices affecting
the rights of children, adolescents and women.
26. Governance, policy, planning and evaluation. The programme component
will build the capacities of institutions at national and subnational levels to develop,
fund and monitor evidence-based, equity-focused, multi-sectoral frameworks and
related policies for children, adolescents and women. Particular focus will be on
governance and social protection. The capacities of national and provincial
legislatures (the latter once a federal structure is initiated) will be strengthened to
ensure legislative compliance with international child rights standards. Working
with the Ministry of Local Development and local bodies, child -friendly governance
systems for integrated planning, monitoring and investment will be developed in
accordance with local child profiles and minimum indicators on child survival,
development, protection and participation. Institutional capacity will also be
strengthened for effective registration for (including birth registration) and delivery
and monitoring of social protection benefits targeting children. Alongside other
partners, UNICEF will continue to support the Ministry of Local Development and
National Planning Commission to implement the District Poverty Monitoring and
Analysis System in selected districts. Finally, the Programme will work closely with
ADAP to ensure children, adolescents and women have the skills to participate in
local decision-making bodies.
27. Disaster risk reduction and emergency preparedness programme. Through
this programme component relevant Ministries and partners will be supported to
develop child-centred and gender-sensitive disaster risk reduction policies and to
mainstream these into sector planning and systems. The capacities of national and
subnational disaster management authorities, civil society organizations and rural
and urban communities in hazard-prone areas will be strengthened to prevent,
prepare for and respond to disasters and, working with other programmes, to reduce
the risks of and adapt to climate change. In times of actual disaster, the programme
will oversee the Humanitarian Action and Cluster Coordination of UNICEF.
28. Cross-sectoral. This component covers cross-sectoral staff salaries, including
the Partnerships, Advocacy and Communication for Development teams as well as
programme review and bottleneck-monitoring costs, travel and training as well as
operational support for country and field office management and administration.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
29. The Comprehensive Peace Accord, the Interim Constitution of Nepal (2007),
the Common Minimum Programme of the Coalition Government, the nation Plan of
Action for Children (2004/5-2014/15), the national Three Year Plan (2011-2013),
together with sector-specific and multi-sectoral plans and policies, have been
considered as the basis for the country programme. The country programme will
help the Government to achieve all its child-related Millennium Development Goals
targets with equity and to address issues beyond the Goals. The country programme
links to the Nepal Peace and Development Strategy (2010 -2015) and 7 out of 11
UNDAF Outcomes described in the summary results matrix.
Relationship to international priorities
30. The country programme will contribute to the Government’s efforts to:
implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Pr otocols as
well as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against

10

Women; follow up on the recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, and the Human Rights Council, on Nepal’s Universal Periodic Review;
comply with Security Council resolutions 1612, 1325, 1820, 1882, 1888, 1960, and
1998; fulfil its commitment to the Millennium Declaration; and to achieve the World
Fit for Children goals. The country programme is also aligned with the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) 2006-2013.
Major partnerships
31. UNICEF will continue to engage with other United Nations entities, for
example: with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and C ultural Organization
and the World Food Programme on education; the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the United Nations
Population Fund on gender-based violence; the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on citizenship; the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS; the United Nations Girls’ Education
Initiative; the United Nations Adolescent Task Force Initiative; and UN-Women and
UN-Habitat’s Safe and Friendly Cities for All Initiative. Engagement with
Government and development partners in health and education SWAps will be
maintained. Collaboration will continue with various NGO net works such as the
Children as Zone of Peace and Child Protection. UNICEF will work with the
National Planning Commission and key Ministries through the new Ending Child
Hunger and Undernutrition Partnership and Scaling Up Nutrition initiative.
Cooperation will be enhanced with the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank
and others to support the Government’s Social Protection Framework. WASH
partnerships will be consolidated across a range of sectors, development partners,
United Nations entities, and NGOs. Where appropriate, private-public partnerships
will be fostered, building on experience from the WASH sector. A new child
protection alliance will be developed among key Ministries, together with major
NGOs. UNICEF will continue as a key partner and member of the National Advisory
Committee for the Local Governance and Community Development Programme.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
32. UNDAF monitoring and evaluation matrices will be used by theme groups to
monitor UNDAF results and prepare annual reports for the Resident Coordinator.
Government-led evaluations will be supported to improve the effectiveness and
ownership of programme results. A real-time monitoring framework will track both
gender equality and efforts to tackle key national and subnational bottlenecks.
Various PCR-level indicators will be measured through population -based surveys to
be conducted before 2017. The Government and UNICEF will annually review
progress of workplans, and a midterm review has been planned for t he second half
of 2015.

11

