Nicaragua
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Nicaragua
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.31) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 second regular session (11-14
September 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final version
was approved at the 2013 first regular session of the Executive
Board on 8 February 2013.

Basic data †
(2010, unless otherwise stated)
Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.4

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

27

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006/2007)
(%, urban/rural, poorer/richer)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

a

b

c
d

95 b
93/94

Primary schoolchildren completing final primary grade (%, m/f, 2007)

48

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

85

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

52

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years old, male/female, 2009)

0.2

Child work (%, children 5-17 years of age, 2005)

15 c

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2006-2007)
(%, urban/rural, poorer/richer)

81 d
../.., 87/77, 72/93 d

GNI per capita (US$)

†

6a
4/7, 9/1

1 080

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

98

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

99

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.childinfo.org/.
Estimates for the underweight children category are based on the child growth standards
adopted by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006.
The reported maternal mortality rate is 67 deaths per 100,000 live births (2007 -2009), as
reported by the Ministry of Health in Análisis estadístico de la Situación de Salud en Nicaragua
2000-2011, 2011. The estimate of 100 deaths per 100,000 live births was prepared by the
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group (WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World
Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths.. www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Estimate based on age group and definition other than the standard indicator.
This estimate refers to the last live birth in the household rather than all children under 5 years
of age.

The situation of children and women
1.
Nicaragua had a population of 5.8 million in 2010; 42 per cent of the
inhabitants are under 18 years old. The indigenous population and persons of African
descent represent 9 per cent of the population. The country is curr ently going through
a demographic transition, as it is mainly composed of adolescents and youth.
2.
Around 50 per cent of children and adolescents are living in poverty, and 19 per
cent, in extreme poverty. 1 The most deprived children are those living in rural areas
and in the autonomous regions of the Caribbean coast. According to the Living
__________________
1

2

National Development Information Institute (INIDE). Nicaragua Bienestar y Equidad en la Infancia.
Estudio sobre Pobreza Infantil y Disparidades. INIDE-UNICEF. 2008.

Standards Measurement Survey for 2009, the percentage of households living in
poverty fell from 48.3 per cent in 2005 to 42.5 per cent in 2009, and extreme
poverty dropped from 17.2 per cent to 14.6 per cent during the same period. 2
3.
Chronic malnutrition in children under 5 declined from 25.8 per cent in 2001
to 21.7 per cent in 2006. 3 Chronic malnutrition is twice as high in rural areas as in
urban areas. The risk of malnutrition is six times higher in the poorest quintile than
in the wealthiest quintile. The prevalence of chronic malnutrition in schoolchildren
6 to 9 years is 27.2 per cent.
4.
During the period 1992-2010, the under-5 mortality rate fell from 72 4 to 27 per
1,000 registered live births. 5 Mortality among children under 1 year of age declined
from 31 deaths per year in 2001 to 29 in 2006. 6 Neonatal mortality has not changed
much over the last 15 years; the rates are 15 per 1,000 live births in the Pacific region
and 22 in the Atlantic. Neonatal mortality accounts for 73 per cent of child deaths.
5.
The coverage of drinking water was 85 per cent in 2010, ranging from 68 per cent
in rural areas to 98 per cent in urban areas. The coverage of sanitation servic es was 52
per cent, ranging between 37 per cent in rural areas and 63 per cent in urban areas. 7
6.
The Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group estimated maternal
mortality at 100 per 100,000 live births in 2008. Based on its own administrative
records, the Ministry of Health reports that maternal mortality has dropped from 76.5
(116 cases) in 2007 to 67 (103 cases) in 2010. Maternal mortality occurs mainly among
poor women with low levels of schooling and limited access to quality health services.
7.
In 2011, the Government of Nicaragua adopted the National Policy on Early
Childhood, which is aimed at guaranteeing comprehensive intervention to restore
the rights of children under six. The policy is designed to coordinate State
programmes targeting early childhood so as to ensure that they are universal and
free, of good quality, equitable, provide human warmth and are culturally relevant.
8.
The prevalence of HIV remains at 0.2 per cent; incidence has risen rapidly
from 4.1 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2003 to 19.9 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2011. Nine
per cent of all new cases of HIV occur among adolescents between 15 and 19 years of
age. The highest prevalence of HIV occurs in the following five departments:
Chinandega, Managua, León, the Atlántico Sur autonomous region (RAAS) and the
Atlántico Norte autonomous region (RAAN).
9.
The net adjusted school enrolment rate in primary education is 93 per cent
among boys and 94 per cent among girls, although it is only 50 per cent in some
municipalities. Forty-three per cent of boys and girls are not enrolled in pre-school
education, and 50 per cent of adolescents are not enrolled in secondary education. Five
hundred thousand children and adolescents between the ages of 3 and 17 are not in the
__________________
2

National Development Information Institute (INIDE). Household Survey on Living Standards 2009
(EMNV 2009).
3
National Development Information Institute (INIDE). Nicaraguan Demographic and Health Survey
(ENDESA) 2006/07.
4 National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC). National Survey on Family Health. Nicaragua. 1992
5
UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation (IGME) 2010.
6
National Development Information Institute (INIDE). Demographic and Health Survey – 2001 and
2006/2007.
7
WHO/UNICEF. Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. Nicaragua. March
2012.

3

educational system; these are children who live in rural areas or are poor or indigenous
or disabled. The poor quality of education is reflected in the lag in schooling levels,
especially the high repetition rate, which rose from 9 per cent in 2007 to 9.5 per cent in
2009 for primary schools, and from 5.2 per cent to 8.2 per cent for secondary schools; 8
the number of over-age students, which in 2009 represented 52.6 per cent of primary
school enrolment (689,071 students were in low grades for their age); the drop -out rate,
especially in the first and seventh grades; and inadequate learning levels. Only 4 out of
10 children entering primary school finish in six years. Of the 10,750 public schools in
the country, only 51.2 per cent have drinking water, and only 22.9 per cent have toilets. 9
10. The Government has improved coverage of primary education by eliminating
fees, conducting a campaign to encourage children to complete the sixth grade,
providing intercultural bilingual education, establishing standards for inclusive
education and adopting a model aimed at promoting quality and shared
responsibility. The main challenges facing the sector are to ensure universal access
to pre-school and secondary education and enhance the learning experience.
11. Birth registration of children under 5 is estimated at 81 per cent. 10 There is no
difference in registration figures for boys and girls, but there are variations in terms
of location and socioeconomic level. While urban communities had an 87 per cent
registration rate, in rural communities, it was only 77 per cent. Ninety-three per cent
of children in the wealthiest quintile were registered, compared with 72 per cent in
the poorest quintile.
12. In 2005, it was estimated that 15 per cent of all children and adolescents aged
5 to 17 were working. In 2010, 18.9 per cent of children between 5 and 13 years old and
14.1 per cent between 14 and 17 were working. 11 In early 2009, the Ministry of the
Family estimated that 5,000 children and adolescents were living in street situations. 12
13. According to data supplied by the National Police, complaints of domestic and
sexual violence rose by 9 per cent in 2010 compared with 2009, for a total of 34,763
complaints. A total of 8,383 victims of domestic and sexual violence were children
and adolescents (24 per cent). Of these, 86 per cent were girls, and 79 per cent of
the cases occurred in their own homes.
14. The State has drafted and adopted a number of laws and policies governing the
right to special protection for children and adolescents who are victims of violence.
The main challenge is to ensure coordination between the institutions that are on the
critical path for dealing with and monitoring cases of violence.
15. Nicaragua is highly vulnerable to emergencies and disasters. The climate
fluctuates between drought and flooding, as well as tropical storms and hurricanes.
Floods have caused 90 per cent of all disasters recorded and 98 per cent of the
effects on populations affected by disasters.
16. In 2010, the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that a greater
effort should be made to reduce the number of children in street situations; to
combat sexual exploitation and trafficking of children; to deal with violence against
__________________
8
9
10
11
12

4

Ministry of Education. Strategic Education Plan 2011-2015. Nicaragua.
Directorate of School Infrastructure, Ministry of Education (MINED).
Development Information Institute. Demographic and Health Survey. 2006-2007.
Development Information Institute. Continuous Household Survey 2010.
Ministry of the Family. Programa Amor.

children, implement the juvenile justice standards established in the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, reduce the number of children not attending school and
improve the quality of education; increase participation by communities, children
and adolescents in budget formulation and monitoring; and strengthen the National
Information System on Child and Adolescent Rights.

Main results and lessons learned from the earlier cooperation
programme (2008-2012)
Main results
17. In coordination with the Pan American Health Organization/World Health
Organization (PAHO/WHO), the programme strengthened the capacity of the
Ministry of Health to improve the quality of health care for women and children in
the framework of the family and community health model. Early care of pregnant
women increased from 38.4 per cent 2006 to 54 per cent in 2010, and coverage of
institutional deliveries, from 51.5 per cent in 2006 to 74.2 per cent in 2010.
Immunization coverage of 1-year-olds remained above 95 per cent.
18. The programme cooperated with the Ministry of Health to ensure
universalization of services to prevent the vertical transmission of HIV and care of
children and adolescents with HIV. The coverage of counselling and voluntary
testing rose from 26 per cent in 2006 to 92 per cent in 2011 in those departments
that were given priority owing to the higher prevalence of HIV in them. The
Ministry of Education has carried out scale programmes to teach about HIV in
primary and secondary schools..
19. The model of quality education was designed and implemented in 15 key
municipalities which serve approximately 50,000 children. The support of UNICEF
for the components of this model consists of: (a) a new curriculum for basic and
secondary education that focuses on competencies; (b) training of 5,634 teachers
under a new teacher-training system; (c) standards for inclusive education for
children with disabilities; (d) intercultural bilingual education in six languages for
children of indigenous communities and communities of African descent on the
Caribbean coast; (e) work with community pre-schoolers and their families as part
of the national policy on early childhood.
20. UNICEF cooperated with the Ministry of the Family on the design and
implementation of Programa Amor, the programme responsible for implementing
the Government’s policy of special protection that is aimed at restoring the rights of
the most deprived children and adolescents. Nineteen of 25 municipalities have
local systems for the protection of children and adolescents. The percentage of
childbirths not registered declined from 35 per cent in 2005 to 20 per cent in 2011.

Lessons learned
21. In preparing the cooperation programme for 2008 -2012, UNICEF identified a
need for increased intersectoral support. The model proposed by the Government of
Nicaragua for the restoration of the rights of children and adolescents stresses
intersectoral action by public institutions. To support disaggregated implementation

5

of the national policy on early childhood, it is essential to ensure close coordination
in the implementation of actions at the municipal level in the fields of health,
education and protection.
22. Transformative teaching, which promotes personal and group reflection leading
to action, has been very helpful in empowering adolescents living in situations of
exclusion. The network of adolescent promoters carried out peer education activities
to develop resilience and leadership skills and encourage dialogue with municipal
authorities. The network of adolescent reporters used different media and
opportunities to further the agendas of adolescents and promote their rights.
23. The cooperation programme has been developing the capacities of the National
Statistical System to generate information, update sectoral statistics and break down
data from analyses of disparities. These initiatives have entailed strengthening the
capacities of the leading statistical agency and other members of the System. The
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit is conducting research on socioeconomic
policies with a view to evaluating their impact on children and adolescents.

Country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Early childhood development

1 000

18 550

19 550

Inclusive quality education

1000

4 700

5 700

Protection of children and adolescents and participation
for comprehensive adolescent development

1000

5 750

6 750

750

1 250

2 000

3 750

30 250

34 000

Intersectoral component
Total

Programme preparation process
24. The cooperation programme is based on the Common Country Assessment
(CCA) and the priorities established in the National Human Development Plan. It
includes the recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child in
the fourth periodic report submitted by Nicaragua in 2010, the Universal Periodic
Review and other human rights committees. As part of the CCA/UNDAF
consultation process, meetings were held with indigenous organizations, women’s
organizations, members of the National Assembl y and the judiciary. Meetings were
also held with the main counterparts and the agencies of the United Nations system,
in order to determine the bases for the programme components. The priorities of
UNDAF and the contribution of UNICEF, as well as those of other United Nations
agencies, were decided in agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Objectives, key results and strategies
25. The cooperation programme will contribute to the restoration of the rights of
children and adolescents by supporting implementation of the National Human

6

Development and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and the post Millennium agenda, and the reduction of disparities and inequalities. The outcomes
will be: (a) children between 0 and 6 years of age in indigenous communities,
communities of African descent and rural areas have access to appropriate
comprehensive services in health and nutrition, education and protection, based on
the family and the community; (b) children and adolescents in rural communit ies of
indigenous and African descent receive quality basic education that provides life
skills and takes into account their sociocultural context; (c) public institutions on the
critical path for prevention of violence against adolescents and response to victims,
at the national and local levels, have the necessary capacities for providing
comprehensive services; (d) seriously deprived adolescents, especially girls, have
spaces, capacities and opportunities for participation.
26. Programme strategies include providing assistance with the design of national
policies and strategies with an intercultural and gender approach, and helping to
reduce disparities through coordinated implementation in the 24 municipalities with
the highest percentage of deprived children and adolescents, mainly on the
Caribbean coast. The programme will strengthen the management capacities of
public institutions, focusing on results, children’s rights and information systems
that allow for disaggregated analysis of data. The programme will strengthen the
capacities of municipal and regional governments to plan, budget and implement
programmes, focusing on rights, participatory management and monitoring and
evaluation, all for the benefit of children. It will support capacity -building in the
autonomous regions of the Caribbean coast, including the indigenous territorial
governments, in connection with the implementation of intercultural models of
protection, health and education.
27. The programme will strengthen national capacities for knowledge generation
and management so as to allow for effective implementation of social policies aimed
at restoring the rights of children. It will focus on the analysis of disparities and
inequalities and their determinants. The work of other United Na tions agencies and
of the academic sector will be coordinated, and exchanges of experiences among
countries will be included. Communication strategies for development will be
applied to encourage families to adopt practices aimed at the protection and
comprehensive development of children and adolescents.
28. The programme will focus on the analysis of gender practices as a determining
factor in child and adolescent development. This will include continuing efforts to
promote childcare as a shared responsibility of the entire family and to encourage
males to play a positive role. Gender equality and non-violence towards girls and
adolescent women will be taught at an early age, especially in the family and at
school. The programme will support initiatives for the construction of new concepts of
masculinity among adolescent men and for the empowerment of adolescent women.
29. The programme will provide support for the National System for Disaster
Prevention, Mitigation and Response and promote the adoption of the Core
Commitments for Children 13 in emergency preparedness and response. Work will
continue on strengthening the planning and action capacities of sectoral working
commissions in the areas of education, water and sanitation, protection and
nutrition. On the Caribbean coast, the cooperation programme will work for the
__________________
13

UNICEF, Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action.

7

adoption of a risk approach to management, including by restoring nature -friendly
traditional practices.
Programme components
30. Comprehensive early childhood development. This component will
contribute to implementation of the national policy on early childhood, assigning
priority to developing competencies for childcare within the family, including
through practices such as early stimulation and child rearing with tenderness; health,
nutrition and hygiene. It will help develop models for interinstitutional work,
adapting them to the special characteristics of indigenous populations and
populations of African descent. It will include the use of monitoring and evaluation
technologies and tools, along with community participation
31. In coordination with PAHO/WHO, it will help the Ministry of Health improve
the quality of Integrated Management of Childhood Illness and eliminate the
mother-to-child transmission of HIV and congenital syphilis. It will also provide
support for intercultural community programmes, helping to coordinate community
activities with midwives and volunteers in maternal homes with the work of family
and community health teams from the Ministry of Health.
32. The component will help expand access to pre-school education for children
between 3 and 5 years of age and extend the duration of that phase, so as to ensure a
timely transition to the first grade of primary school. It will help improve quality by
training teachers through workshops on evaluation, programming and teacher
training, 14 demonstration classrooms, teacher circles and refresher courses. This
will include support for teacher-training schools, provision of educational supplies
and application of the single tool for measuring child development.
33. The component will work with the central registry of marital status on the
registration of populations living in remote areas, indigenous populations and
persons of African descent. This will include modernization of b irth registration in
municipalities, operation of registration services in hospitals, application of
communication strategies for changing social norms and training of community
leaders for real-time monitoring. At the national level, support will be provi ded for
implementation of the new Civil Registry Act.
34. Inclusive quality education. This component will contribute to implementation
of the strategic education plan with a view to ensuring that children and adolescents
from indigenous communities, persons of African descent and rural communities
have access to and are able to complete quality basic education that will give them
life skills, taking into account their sociocultural context. To this end, it will help
with the design and implementation of strategies for enabling children and
adolescents to complete the sixth and ninth grades in rural areas and remote
indigenous communities. This will include strengthening the national teacher training system through the design and implementation of new educat ional
programmes, standards, teaching materials and qualified trainers for beginning and
continuous training of teachers. At the local level, it will contribute to accelerated
training of multi-grade teachers in the four teacher-training schools that serve the 24
municipalities with the highest poverty indices.
__________________
14

8

Workshops on Evaluation, Programming and Training in Education (TEPCES).

35. Support will be provided for the development of flexible programmes that will
be attractive and useful to excluded populations, as well as technical support for the
development of culturally appropriate methodologies aimed at promoting and
ensuring inclusion, teacher training, gender equality and community involvement.
36. Since the indigenous population and persons of African descent have less
access to quality education, special emphasis will be placed on supporting the
educational system of the autonomous regions to ensure that they have access to
bilingual intercultural education.
37. Support will be provided for the national system for evaluation of the learning
experience. To this end, assistance will be provided for strengthening capacities for
the implementation of quality education, including in areas such as healthy
environments and practices, food security, water and hygiene, prevention of
violence and HIV, gender practices, risk manageme nt and climate change. The
fundamental strategy will be to strengthen the national teacher-training system in
the areas of participatory training (intercapacitación), systematization and
dissemination of good practices.
38. The programme will continue to work with the Ministry of Education on
standardization of water and sanitation regulations for school infrastructure, along
with a menu of appropriate technological options for different situations.
39. The component will help to ensure that adolescents in situations of exclusion,
especially women, have spaces, skills and opportunities to receive an education that
focuses on life skills, especially in rural secondary schools.
40. The programme will contribute to the design and implementation of education
policies, programmes and strategies of national scope that stress equity, gender and
the intercultural approach. At the same time, it will provide support for the generation
of knowledge that will allow for systematic pedagogical innovation and the
achievement of concrete results in the classroom as feedback for national policies.
41. Protection of children and adolescents and participation for
comprehensive adolescent development. The component will help design policies
and programmes for mitigating the different manifestations of violence against
children and adolescents and creating protective environments for those who live in
situations of exclusion.
42. The programme will provide technical assistance for the assessment of
disparities and enhancement of the capacities of the Ministry of the Family to apply
the standard procedures for the restoration of rights and special protection
(Programa Amor). In 24 municipalities, support will be offered for prevention of
and response to situations of violence, commercial sexual exploitation and
trafficking, in keeping with the recommendations of the United Nations Study on
Violence against Children. Support will be provided for the intersectoral work of the
National Coalition against Trafficking in Persons and for imp lementation of the
model of comprehensive services to victims of violence, which will be adapted to
the context of indigenous communities.
43. The programme will assist the judiciary with implementation and coordination
of juvenile justice on the Caribbean coast and in priority municipalities. It will help
the Office of the Public Prosecutor with implementation of criminal prosecution
policies in the departments.

9

44. Under the leadership of the Institute on Youth, the programme will help define
a national policy for comprehensive adolescent development with the participation
of the ministries of education, health and the family and in coordination with
agencies of the United Nations system.
45. Reflective activities will be carried out with adolescents in situations of
exclusion, making use of their own spaces, to promote the development of skills for
self-help and protection. To promote these processes, the network of adolescent
reporters and the network of adolescent promoters will be expanded.
46. The competencies of families will be strengthened to enable them better to
understand the challenges faced by adolescents and guarantee an atmosphere of
protection and support. Municipal governments and citizens’ groups ( Gabinetes de
Poder Ciudadano) will be strengthened in order to enhance their skills for
intergenerational dialogue with adolescents. In addition, the capacities of adolescent
organizations will be strengthened to facilitate their effective participation in
decision-making situations.
47. The programme will strengthen the capacities of the National Statistical System to
produce and analyse disaggregated information on children and adolescents, with
emphasis on the analysis of the situation of seriously deprived children and adolescents
and of disparities based on gender, ethnic origin, generation, socioeconomic level and
place of birth. It will also strengthen the capacities of the Ministry of the Family to
generate and analyse information on the situation of children and to follow up on the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
48. Intersectoral component. This component covers the cost of planning the
cooperation programme and implementing the gender and intercultural approach. It
includes actions aimed at ensuring synergy among the agencies of the United
Nations system and administrative action pertaining to programme execution and
field office operations, as well as technical assistance for monitoring and evaluation
and for communication.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
49. In January 2012, agreement was reached on the contribution of the United
Nations system to the four national priorities that give continuity to the National
Human Development Plan. The UNICEF cooperation programme will contribute
directly to the first two: (a) to considerably reduce inequities and poverty to achieve
sustainable human development; and (b) to guarantee the right of the Nicaraguan
people to food security, health, education and well-being. A cross-cutting approach
will be followed for all components of the UNICEF contribution to local
development and risk management and mitigation of climate change.
Relationship with international priorities
50. The programme contributes to achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and the Millennium Declaration, implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169, the Regional Initiative
for the Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV and Congenital Syphilis

10

in Latin America and the Caribbean and the ministerial declaration of Mexico on
“Preventing through education”. The programme includes the recommendations of
the United Nations Study on Violence against Children and the educational goals for
2021 promoted by the Organization of Ibero-American States.
Major partnerships
51. The main national counterparts are the ministries of the family, of health and
of education, and the National System for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and
Response. The programme will work with the Institute for Youth on an interinstitutional
approach to comprehensive adolescent development. It will work with the councils and
autonomous governments of the Caribbean coast, the indigenous territorial
governments, traditional organizations and the Secretariat for Development of the
Caribbean Coast. On issues of violence and access of youth to justice, it will continue
working with the National Assembly, the National Police, the Supreme Court of Justice,
the Office of the Public Prosecutor and the Office of the Human Rights Advocate. It
will also work with municipal governments and adolescent organizations. In
coordination with government institutions, strategies will be developed for work
with universities, social organizations that support the implementation of national
policies at the local level and monitoring of the situation of the rights of the child.
52. UNICEF will work with PAHO and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) on reduction of maternal and child mortality; with UNDP on
strengthening of the autonomous governments of the Caribbean coast, and with the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) on combating trafficking in children
and adolescents. Among the other programmes and inter-agency actions in which
UNICEF participates are those relating to elimination of violence against women,
HIV prevention and development of indigenous peoples.
53. It will continue its partnership with the World Bank, the Inter-American
Development Bank and other donors to implement interventions for child
development, and with the Global Partnership for Education to improve access to and
quality of pre-school education. UNICEF will expand its partnership with the private
sector to channel resources and implement strategies for early childhood develop ment.
Programme supervision, evaluation and management
54. The Ministry of Foreign Relations is the Government agency responsible for
coordinating the cooperation programme with UNICEF. Counterpart institutions will
prepare biennial workplans to operationalize implementation.
55. A comprehensive plan for monitoring and evaluation of the programme will be
drawn up. The plan will cover the main studies, evaluations and monitoring
activities to be carried out and will be updated on a yearly basis. Monitoring of
implementation will entail conducting regular field visits, preferably with the
partners involved in implementation. Monitoring and evaluation activities will be
coordinated with other United Nations agencies in the context of UNDAF.
56. Progress will be reviewed at annual meetings with the main counterparts and
agencies of the United Nations system, under the coordination of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. The mid-term review of the programme will be conducted in 2015, and
changes will be made in programme strategies, should that be deemed necessary.

11

