Niger
Country programme document
2014-2018

The draft country programme document for Niger
(E/ICEF/2013/P/L.6) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2013 annual session (18-21 June
2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 September 2013.

Basic data†
(2011, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)
Use of improved drinking water resources (%, 2010)
Use of improved sanitation services (%, 2010)

4.6/4.4
125
39
40/37, 44/39, ../..
590 a
49
9

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

75 b

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

76 b

Primary school enrolment/attendance (net %, male/female, 2010)

64/52

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2010)

71/67

HIV prevalence rate among adults (%), 15-49 years, male/female
HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under age of 5, 2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (United States dollars)
Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
†

a

b

c

0.8
..
43/43
32 c
32/31, 71/25, 20/67 c
360
4.6/4.4
125

Additional data on women and children as well as detailed methodological notes on
estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org.
The figure reported in the table above is the adjusted maternal mortality rate calculated by
the United Nations Interagency Group for the establishment of maternal mortality estimates.
The estimate reported at the country level is 648 deaths per 100,000 live births (2006), as
indicated in the 2006 population and health survey/multiple indicator cluster survey.
The figures reported in the table above on immunization are interagency estimat es prepared
by the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF. The data are disaggregated by
gender as follows: DTC3 male 68 per cent and female 71 per cent, as indicated in the 2010
child survival survey for the Niger; measles male 68 per cent and female 69 per cent, as
indicated in the 2010 child survival survey for the Niger.
The data are different from the definition of the standard indicator.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
With a population of 16.3 million people, 80 per ce nt of who live in rural areas
and 57 per cent of who are children, the Niger ranks 186th out of 187 countries
surveyed in the 2011 Human Development Report. It has a high rate of fertility
(7.6 children per woman nationwide and 8.1 in rural areas), rapid population growth
(3.3 per cent per year) and insufficient economic growth (2.1 per cent) to satisfy
social demand. As a result, the country experiences widespread poverty (59.5 per
cent in urban areas and 63.9 per cent in rural areas), exacerbated by soci oeconomic
inequalities, gender disparities and various crises, including floods, locust
infestations, recurring food crises and desertification. The main causes of inequality

2

include living in rural areas, being female, poverty, vulnerability to natural di sasters,
food insecurity and a nomadic way of life.
2.
Insecurity in neighbouring countries (Libya, Nigeria, Mali), with an influx of
migrants and refugees, as well as the terrorist threat in the country have led to an
increase in spending in defence and security to the detriment of the social sectors.
However, the outlook for an economic recovery seems bright, owing to oil and
mineral exports, which are expected to double between 2011 and 2016.
3.
Child mortality fell by 6 per cent per year between 2006 and 2012 (2012
demographic and health survey/multiple indicator cluster survey for the Niger),
exceeding the threshold needed to achieve Goal 4 of the Millennium Development
Goals by 4.3 per cent. Nonetheless, maternal and neonatal mortalities remain high,
especially in rural areas, owing to early pregnancies and the high rate of fertility, in
a context where more than two thirds (71 per cent) of deliveries take place without
medical assistance. The insufficiency and uneven distribution of resources,
dependence on external financing, isolation of some communities and a nomadic
way of life limit equitable access to quality health services. The insufficient
availability of essential medicines and water outlets in health facilities, technical
weaknesses and delays in seeking care inhibit the use of these services.
4.
The high level of chronic malnutrition (46 per cent but reaching 50 per cent in
Maradi and Zinder) and the rate of acute malnutrition, which constantly exceeds the
alert threshold (10 per cent) and the emergency threshold (15 per cent) during years
of food insecurity, increase the risk of morbidity and mortality and compromise the
growth and development of young children. Micronutrient deficiencies are a major
public health concern in the Niger, where more than 7 out of 10 children suffer from
anaemia. Infant and young child feeding practices are still inadequate; only 23 per
cent of newborns are breastfed exclusively and the quality of supplementary feeding
meets the standard for only 3 out of 100 children. The main causes are recurring
food insecurity, inadequate family and community care, insufficient use of health
services exacerbated by poverty, social inequalities and population growth. Limited
access to drinking water and open defecation are also aggravating factors.
5.
HIV/AIDS prevalence ranges from 0.8 per cent overall to 1.7 per cent among
pregnant women and exceeds 20 per cent among female sex workers. Pregnant
women have limited access to HIV counselling and testing during prenatal
consultations, and many care needs of pregnant women and HIV-positive children
are not met, likely owing to inadequate knowledge of means of prevention, limited
availability of antiretroviral medication and limited access to quality care.
6.
Despite ongoing improvements in school enrolment rates, the performances
are insufficient to meet Goal 2 of the Millennium Development Goals and reduce
disparities in enrolment rates between boys and girls (88 per cent versus 71 per
cent), and between children living in the cities and those living in rural areas
(108 per cent versus 71 per cent). These inequalities are primarily due to
inadequacies in allocation of resources, lack of classrooms and qualified teaching
staff, persistent sociocultural practices that impede educa tion, especially for girls,
and poverty and food insecurity, which limit access to education for the most
disadvantaged children. The rapid increase in the number of school -age children,
which is expected to double between 2010 and 2020, is a major challen ge for the
provision of quality educational services to all children.

3

7.
In the Niger, children are exposed to various forms of abuse and violence. The
rate of childbirth registration remains low (32 per cent), especially in rural areas
(25 per cent), and nearly three quarters of working boys and girls perform work that
is harmful for their development. Early marriage, which affects more than 75 per
cent of young girls, is a major problem for the protection of children, especially in
rural areas. Their protection is also hampered by other factors, including inadequate
mechanisms for coordination and consultation with communities and children,
insufficient availability and use of protection services, maintenance of traditional
practices that promote early marriage and child labour. The resistance of certain
pressure groups to the passage of laws, including certain provisions of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women that
promote gender equality, is a major impediment to the protection of young girls and
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation
2009-2013
Key results achieved
8.
Substantial results were recorded thanks to effective m obilization of resources,
for both the regular programme and the emergency component. The rate of child
mortality in the Niger fell by 6 per cent per year between 2006 and 2012, surpassing
the rates recorded in neighbouring countries. That performance was attributable to
the promotion of essential family practices, combating of malnutrition, and
reduction of financial and geographical barriers to access to health services.
9.
In its response to the nutritional crises that occurred between 2010 and 2012,
the programme supported the establishment of a network of more than 800 nutritional
rehabilitation centres, which provided care to more than one million children
suffering from severe acute malnutrition. The policy of integrating efforts to tackle
malnutrition, which is encouraged and supported by UNICEF, has laid the
groundwork for the extension of these gains over time. Emergency response has
been effective thanks to early and joint planning, good coordination within clusters
where UNICEF has played a key role, and effective mobilization of resources under
the Consolidated Appeal Process.
10. The programme also helped to improve access to education, with a doubling of
the preschool enrolment rate and a 3 per cent annual increase in primary school
enrolment and completion rates.
11. The results of the programme evaluation show that, in the area of child
protection, improvement of the institutional framework with the creation of civil
registry departmental divisions, the training of judges and the establishme nt of a
minors’ squad are essential gains for a systemic approach to child protection.
Community-based interventions in the areas of essential family practices,
community-led total sanitation and protection contributed to increased awareness
and behavioural changes, which augur well for the rights of the child. The
programme contributed to the adoption of a national social protection policy and the
development of operational strategies, such as the transfer of funds in emergency
situations.

4

Lessons learned
12. The mid-term review showed that, in the context of recurring crises,
implementation of the regular programme while ensuring effective response to
emergencies requires (a) integration of an emergency segment into the various
programmatic components; and (b) flexibility and strengthening of synergies in
programming, regular monitoring and development of strategic partnerships, in
order to improve the emergency response alert and coordination system, and
documentation of and building on lessons learned in order to harmonize
interventions.
13. According to the results of the programme evaluation, implementation of
community interventions must be based on (a) involvement of State services and
local elected officials in order to build on experiences and e nsure a sense of
ownership and sustainability through the involvement of other partners in the sector;
(b) mobilization and empowerment of communities to start changing norms and
behaviours and create an environment conducive to their dissemination; and
(c) implementation of coordination and consultation mechanisms connecting the
various actors, as in the case of community-led total sanitation, essential family
practices and child protection.

The country programme, 2014-2018
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme components

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival

18 000

35 675

53 675

Nutrition

15 500

22 702

38 202

Education

15 500

22 500

38 000

Child protection

10 000

9 600

19 600

Communication for development

10 000

7 100

17 100

Social policy, planning, survival and evaluation

11 000

2 250

13 250

Intersectoral

14 078

5 000

19 078

94 078

104 827

198 905

Total a
a

Based on the amounts mobilized over the past few years; other resource s and emergency
funds of $20 million to $30 million are expected annually, representing $100 million to $150
million for five years, not included in the above total.

Preparation process
14. The process started in 2011 during the programme mid -term review, with the
participation of government partners, the United Nations system, civil society,
children and communities. In 2012, updating of the situation analysis and evaluation
of the programme strategies using an equity-based approach guided the definition of
the strategic vision and fuelled internal discussions and consultations with the
regional office at the time of the strategic reflection. The programme strategic
orientations are aligned with the national priorities of the Economic and Social

5

Development Plan 2012-2015 and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2014-2018. They were validated by the Government and civil
society actors.
Programme components, results and strategies
15. The new programme aims to ensure the full realization of the rights of children
in the Niger and a reduction of disparities, with the aim of achieving equity. It will
ensure that gains are consolidated through the scaling up of successful interventions
and strengthening of synergies with the United Nations system and other partners, in
order to implement a package of measures that would help to improve the resilience
of vulnerable communities. Most of the interventions will be carried out nationwide,
with an emphasis on the regions of Agadez, Diffa, Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder. Girls,
people living in rural areas, the poorest and nomads, who have been identified as the
most disadvantaged, will be the priority target.
16. Each programme component will operate at the strategic and operational levels
and will include an emergency segment, in accordance with the Core Commitments
to Children in Humanitarian Action, in order to address crises and disasters while
ensuring a linkage between humanitarian action and development.
17. The programme will be divided into six components, with the following results:
Child survival: (a) children under 5 years of age and pregnant women, particularly
the most vulnerable, benefit more from quality high -impact interventions for the
prevention and management of maternal and childhood illnesses; (b) pregnant
women, adolescents and children have access to and make greater use of quality
preventive and curative care services for an AIDS-free generation; and (c) children,
particularly the most vulnerable, have improved access to drinking water and
adequate sanitation facilities in schools, health centres and communities for the
prevention of illnesses. Nutrition: children under 5 years of age and pregnant and
breastfeeding women, particularly the most vulnerable, have access to and make
greater use of quality promotional, preventive and curative care services for the
prevention of chronic malnutrition, management of acute malnutrition and reduction
of micronutrient deficiencies. Education: school-age children, especially girls,
children living in rural areas and vulnerable children have access to and make
greater use of quality basic education services. Child protection: the most
vulnerable children and adolescents are better protected from abuse, violence and
exploitation. Communication for development: leaders, communities, families and
young people adopt norms and behaviours that are more favourable for the survival,
development, protection and participation of children. Social policy, planning,
monitoring and evaluation: the rights of children, particularly the most vulnerable,
are better reflected in national and local development policies, strategies and
programmes, as well as in the allocation and use of public resources.
18. The main programme strategies will be built around a human rights- and
gender-based approach: the focus will be on the participation of communities,
children and young people, and specific interventions will target the most
disadvantaged. They will consist in capacity- and system-building, delivery of
services and communication for development. Each component will include an
advocacy and strategic partnership element and a community element to improve
access to and use of services provided. Priority will be given to reducing
inequalities and improving the resilience of households, communities and systems.

6

19. Resilience will be operationalized through six pillars: (a) reducing the
prevalence of chronic malnutrition; (b) improving access to basic social services;
(c) promoting social and behavioural change; (d) implementing the social protection
policy; (e) operationalizing risk prevention and response mechanisms ( disaster risk
reduction, adapting to climate change and strengthening peace); and
(f) strategic partnership.
Child survival
20. The programme will rely on strategic partnerships developed with the United
Nations system (World Health Organization, United Nations Population Fund,
World Bank), the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, the Global Fund
and other health partners, to help implement the sectoral approach and speed up
progress toward improving the mobilization and optimal use of resources. It will
aim to reduce disparities and improve the resilience of the most disadvantaged.
21. Gains made in reducing child mortality will be consolidated and the
programme will focus more on reducing maternal and neonatal mortalities. The
programme will support application of the Monitoring Results for Equity System in
the national health information system, reform of the national supply and
distribution system, revision of free health care implementation mechanisms, and
development of a new package at the health post level. Mass campaign efforts will
be intensified with continued distribution of insecticide -treated bed nets and an
expanded immunization programme to eliminate neonatal tetanus, control measles
and eradicate poliomyelitis. Scaling-up of the child survival strategy will help to
improve the way in which the main child killer diseases (diarrhoea, pneumonia and
malaria) are handled at all levels, especially at the community level. To combat
maternal and neonatal mortalities, the emphasis will be on refocused prenatal
consultation and strengthening of emergency obstetrical and neonatal services. The
newborn care package will be expanded in first-aid and reference health facilities
(newborn units) as well as in the community.
22. Priority will be placed on preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV and
providing paediatric care to infected and affected children. Prevention of mother -tochild transmission sites will be expanded to all medical facilities in the country and
prevention of mother-to-child transmission will be systematically integrated into
refocused prenatal consultation and emergency obstetrical and neonatal services.
The partnership with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS will be
strengthened to ensure interventions are complementary.
23. The water, hygiene and sanitation component will strive to develop the
sectoral approach within the framework of the Sanitation and Water for All
partnership. Implementation of the national planning for results initiative will help
to improve intersectoral coordination, strategic planning and monitoring and
evaluation. Given the low rate of access to drinking water for rural com munities and
the high rate of equipment failure (19 per cent), the programme will support the
establishment of a reliable infrastructure monitoring and evaluation system. The
programme will contribute to the scaling-up of community-led total sanitation,
installation of drinking water outlets, latrines and hand -washing equipment in
schools and health centres in target areas, and promotion of hand -washing. Low-cost
bore holes will be drilled in eligible communities.

7

Nutrition
24. Nutrition will become a stand-alone programmatic component. It will aim to
consolidate the gains made in the management of acute malnutrition by continuing
to implement the policy of integrating acute malnutrition into public entities and
strengthening the capacities of beneficiaries and the coordination capacities of
central, regional and departmental entities. In its efforts to combat chronic
malnutrition, the programme will support implementation of multisectoral and large scale integrated interventions during the 1,000-day window from the start of a
woman’s pregnancy until the child’s second birthday. The focus will be on
improvement of recommended infant and young child feeding practices, vitamin A
supplementation and de-worming, and home-based food fortification.
25. The programme will work in collaboration with the Government, particularly
in the context of the 3N ("Nigeriens Nourish Nigeriens") Initiative and with the
Scale-Up Nutrition and Renewed Efforts Against Child Hunger and undernutrition
(REACH) platforms. A partnership will be developed with the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the World Health Organization (WHO) for the management
of acute malnutrition, as well as with various non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) for community interventions. Collaboration with the n ational crisis
prevention and management system and national and international NGOs in
emergency response will be strengthened. A partnership will be established with the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), WFP and the
Ministries of Water Resources, Agriculture and Education to strengthen the
resilience of vulnerable households. Building on the gains achieved in the handling
of the food and nutritional crisis of 2012, during which water, sanitation and
hygiene in nutrition and psychosocial stimulation were integrated into the
management of severe acute malnutrition, collaboration with the water, sanitation
and hygiene, health and child protection sectors will be strengthened, in order to
speed up improvement of the nutritional status of young children.
Education
26. The interventions will be in three main areas: strengthening system
management and steering capacities, improving access to and keeping children in
school, and upgrading the quality of learning and teaching condition s. The
programme will support implementation of the sectoral approach by becoming more
involved in coordinating the partnership framework and steering the Education and
Training Sectoral Plan for 2013-2020. The programme will be implemented in line
with the Global Partnership for Education and key partnerships, such as the joint
school feeding strategy with WFP, FAO and UN-Women, the goal of which is to
keep girls in school and reduce the school dropout rate related to food insecurity.
27. To improve access to and keeping of children in school at a time when the
school-age population is increasingly rapidly, the programme will help to ensure
that school supplies and infrastructure are available and to develop inclusive and
alternative education models. It will work to reduce disparities through interventions
that facilitate the enrolment of girls, children in rural communities and children with
special needs. The quality of education will be improved by modelling approaches
that aim to strengthen institutions for the training of teachers and the provision of
educational support in the community. Basic standards of quality and equity will be

8

adopted and implemented. The programme will participate in the promotion of
education for peace and in emergency response.
Child protection
28. This component will help to strengthen civil registry services in the
266 municipalities and to put in place a package of services for the protection of
children and adolescents against abuse, violence and exploitation. It will strengthen
the legal, institutional, community and family environment for better exercise of
rights. The programme will continue to support State and non-State institutions to
ensure that their legal and institutional frameworks are aligned with internati onal
conventions. The advocacy partnership with the National Assembly, civil society
and the United Nations system will be strengthened. The programme will continue
to support implementation of the systemic child protection approach.
29. It will support protection initiatives at the community level and will work in
collaboration with schools, NGOs and community organizations to eliminate abuse,
violence and exploitation of children, particularly adolescent girls. To improve
prevention and care for at-risk children and adolescents or victims, the technical
capacities of social action and justice partners will be reinforced and preventive and
judicial education services as well as social services at the court level will be
developed..
Communication for development
30. This new cross-cutting component will be responsible for coordinating,
integrating and modelling interventions designed to promote social and behavioural
change. It will continue to support the scaling-up of current community approaches
(community-led total sanitation, protection, essential family practices). It will target
families and households to adopt positive behaviours, as well as adolescents as
development actors and agents of change. The life skills and decision -making
abilities of adolescents will be strengthened. The leadership and organizational
skills of communities will be improved to make it easier for communities to
participate in decision-making processes and to enhance their resilience.
31. At the institutional level, the programme will support development of the skills
of decentralized technical services, community officials, media outlets and entities
representing youth. Alliances and strategic partnerships will also be created or
strengthened with the media, pressure groups, local leaders and elected officials in
the field of social norms and youth participation. Partnerships will also be
developed with the United Nations system for the prevention of HIV among
adolescents and for peacebuilding.
Social policy, planning and monitoring
32. This cross-cutting component will help to place the rights of children at the
centre of national policies and financial reform agendas while strengthening local
development. The programme will support the national strategic planning syst em to
ensure that the rights of the child and equity are better reflected in the social and
economic development programme and sectoral policies, as well as implementation
of reforms for budgetary efficiency and efficacy. Support for implementation of the
national social protection policy will help to reduce children ’s vulnerability and to
strengthen family resilience. Decentralization will be supported by putting in place

9

decentralized models based on the strengthening of equity in programme focus areas
and implementation of the transfer of jurisdiction and resources to municipalities.
33. The programme will work to improve and manage knowledge on the situation
of children and women in order to advocate children ’s rights and the formulation of
public policies. It will also support the scaling-up of the Monitoring Results for
Equity System by strengthening sectoral information systems, including in the areas
of health, education and child protection; developing partnerships with the National
Statistics Institute, sectoral ministries and research institutions, in order to
strengthen monitoring mechanisms at the local level and elimination of bottlenecks
that impede the effectiveness and impact of interventions; and building national
monitoring and evaluation capacities with a view to institutionalizing evaluations.
Intersectoral
34. The intersectoral component covers programme management and support
needs, including human resources, advocacy and resource mobilization,
procurement, logistics, operation of zone offices, and administrative costs and
operational expenses.
Relationship with national priorities and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework
35. The programme is perfectly aligned with the national priorities of the 2012 2015 economic and social development programme, the 3N Initiative and sectoral
policies and programmes, reflecting the Government’s commitment to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals and to combat poverty and vulnerability. The
programme will contribute to the achievement of three strategic results of UNDAF
2014-2018: (a) resilience (food and nutritional security, environmental management,
prevention and management of risks and catastrophes); (b) social development and
human capital; and (c) promotion of governance, peace and security.
Relationship with international priorities
36. The programme is guided by the principles of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the document entitled “A world fit for children” and other international
human rights treaties. It is in line with international orientations related to the
Millennium Development Goals, the Millennium Declaration, the medium -term
strategic plan, the “A Promise Renewed” commitment and the development agenda
beyond 2015. It will help to implement the principles of the Paris Declaration on
Aid Effectiveness.
Major partnerships
37. The programme will strengthen existing partnerships with the Government,
national and international NGOs, technical and financial partners and donors, in
order to maximize both the overall and the sectoral results. Partnerships with
national and local entities (communities, youth associations, local authorities, the
media and the national private sector) will play a key role in the areas of social and
community change and advocacy in respect of children’s rights. The programme
will also contribute to the effective functioning of the clusters in order to put up a
coordinated and multisectoral response to emergencies.

10

38. Within the United Nations system, the partnership strategy will be adopted for
the implementation of UNDAF and the “Delivering as one” guidelines. The
programme will participate in the development of joint initiatives with United
Nations agencies on priority topics such as resilience, combating HIV/AIDS,
tackling maternal and neonatal mortalities, social protection and promotion of
children’s and women’s rights.
Programme monitoring, evaluation and management
39. The steering committee will coordinate the programme under the auspices of
the Ministry of Planning, with the participation of ministries involved in
implementing the programmatic components. That coordination will be in line with
the national mechanisms for monitoring the economic and social development
programme.
40. An equity-based, participatory monitoring and evaluation system will be set up
to monitor disparities and bottlenecks and guide decision-makers to ensure that they
take appropriate corrective measures. Surveys, studies, evaluations and strengthening
of monitoring and evaluation at both the national and the community levels called
for in the Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Framework will help to provide
quantitative and qualitative data for the monitoring of all programme components.
Additional data are expected to be collected in 2013 to provide information on the
frame of reference for all indicators contained in the results matrix. Continuous
analysis of the situation of children and women, evaluation of the main components
using the equity-based approach, and the mid-term review scheduled for 2016 will
guide implementation of the programme and documentation of lessons learned.
DevInfo will be used to promote better use of data for decision -making. Rapid
evaluations of humanitarian situations and implementation of the harmonized
approach to cash transfers are among the priorities. These activities will help to
strengthen the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation system and national programmes.

11

