Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (E/ICEF/2010/P/L.9) was presented to
the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2010 annual
session (1-4 June 2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

Basic data†
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

6.5

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

55

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)*

19

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2005)**

77
a

Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

—
100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

—

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

—

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old)

—
b

GNI per capita (US$)
One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

92

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
* WHO child growth standard.
** The 2005 estimate developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 370 per 100,000 live births.
a
Net primary school attendance is 99 per cent, according to the MICS 2009; gender disparity
data is not yet available.
b
Low income ($975 or less).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Social development, and consequently progress towards achieving the related
Millennium Development Goals, presents a mixed picture in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, with some of the Goals reportedly achieved while
others are lagging behind. With a total country population of 24 million (census
2008), it does not seem likely that the country will be able to achieve most of the
Goals. In relation to Goal 2 (achieving universal education), a n ational 11-year free
compulsory education policy ensures that all children completed secondary
education. Literacy rates are near universal. Still, teaching methods have not
evolved alongside international standards. While selected multimedia materials hav e
been introduced in some urban centres, basic teaching materials do not meet the
needs of the country.
2.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has done well in promoting some
aspects of Goal 3, in particular achieving gender equality and empowering w omen.
Indicators relating to parity between boys and girls in schools and female/male
literacy are all met, according to Government accounts. Women and men are paid
the same wages, and women enjoy a flexible five-month period of paid maternity
leave. However, while women’s participation in wage employment is quite high, the
gender composition of senior positions in the Government and amongst members of
the Supreme People’s Assembly shows wide disparities, with women holding 16 per
cent of positions. Gender stereotypes remain deep-rooted, and women continue to
assume a greater proportion of the household burden.

2

3.
In the health sector, despite the gains of the 1980s, the current levels of infant
and maternal mortality — the infant mortality rate (IMR) is at 19 per 1,000 live
births and the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) at 77 per 100,000 live births —
remain considerably higher than in the 1990s (IMR of 13 per 1,000 live births and
MMR of 50 per 100,000 live births). The Government is working to improve these
rates in order to achieve Goals 4 and 5 (reducing the IMR by two thirds and the
MMR by three quarters by 2015). The malnutrition rates remain very high, and
management of severe and acute malnutrition needs to be improved.
4.
Lack of access to quality reproductive healthcare, including family planning,
newborn and child health services, is a key constraint. Additional challenges include
insufficient resources to expand essential service packages throughout the country;
limited information on international standards and best practices; and inadequate
monitoring and supervision capacities. The inadequate nutritional status of women
before pregnancy has causal effect on maternal mortality and morbidity, and needs
to be addressed.
5.
While the Government has paid more attention to the prevention of HIV/AIDS
in recent years, limited public awareness of HIV transmission, increasing cross border travel and a health system not equipped to treat infected people all highlight
the need for additional efforts in prevention and management. Malaria prevails in
varying degrees in seven out of ten provinces. Since its re -emergence in the late
1990s, the country managed to dramatically reduce the annual caseload from
296,540 cases in 2001 to 7,436 cases in 2007. The present estimate for tuberculosis
reflects an overall figure of 79,000, of which 44,379 are new smear positive cases.
UNICEF has exceptionally accepted the request to act as the Principal Recipient,
with the World Health Organization (WHO) undertaking the role of Sub Recipient,
for the Global Funds to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria from 2010 to 2014.
This places UNICEF in the unique position to lead and manage the programmatic,
financial, monitoring and evaluation components, as well as undertake the
procurement of all health and non-health commodities. The approved funds total
approximately $88 million, available from mid-2010 for five years, and will provide
critical resources to accelerate efforts towards the attainment of Goal 6.
6.
The situation in the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) sector continues to
be of concern. The extensive piped water supply systems put in place during the
early 1980s are now in ailing condition due to low levels of investments and
rehabilitation, shortage of electricity and destruction caused by natural disasters.
While almost all households have access to some form of sanitation facility,
observations made particularly in rural areas suggest that latrines are predominantly
rudimentary and therefore remain ineffective in preventing faecal materials from
entering into the human environment. As a result, diarrhoea caused by inadequate
water quality, poor sanitation and unhygienic personal behaviour is still amongst the
leading causes of under-five mortality. The Government has been encouraging the
replacement of pumping water systems with gravity-fed water systems, along with
the introduction of decentralized waste water treatment systems. Thus, the period
2011-2015 is crucial for the Government to achieve Goal 7 (halving the pop ulation
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation).

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2010

3

Key results achieved
7.
In collaboration with the Global Alliance for Vaccine Initiative (GAVI) and
WHO, routine full immunization coverage is now over 95 per cent amongst children
under one year of age and coverage for the third dose of the combined
diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus and the hepatitis B vaccines increased from 82 per cent
in 2006 to 94 per cent in 2009. In 2008, a national immunization coverage survey
conducted by an independent international consultancy validated the excellent
performance of the Expanded Programme of Immunization (EPI). The assessment of
the cold-chain infrastructure and operations throughout the country resulted in a
replacement plan that improved systematic planning and optimized EPI services.
8.
In 2007, prompt response by UNICEF and WHO to a major measles outbreak
resulted in the vaccination of 16 million people in eight weeks, successfully
containing the epidemic. Similarly, rapid and efficient response by UNICEF with
other key development partners to the major flooding in 2007 strengthened the
Government’s response to the affected populations through the provision of safe
water supply, medicines and essential health care while containing the spread of
diseases. Rapid assessments on nutritional impact on children were conducted, and
schools were promptly reopened. This prompted the development of a maternal and
newborn care package, which was distributed to all focus counties. Labour wards
and intensive care units were renovated, contributing to improved obstetric care,
ensuring safer deliveries. The success of the maternal and newborn care package led
to its replication and expanding use across normal programme areas.
9.
The preliminary report of the 2009 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS
2009) shows that over 68 per cent of households consumed iodized salt while 98 per
cent of children (aged 6-59 months) received two doses of vitamin A supplements.
In addition, 98 per cent of children (aged 2-5 years) received deworming pills
regularly. To prevent anaemia and possible neurotubal defects in newborns, the
micronutrient supplementation policy was revised to introduce iron-folate
supplementation in adolescent girls (ages 16-17 years), weekly iron-folate
supplementation during pre-conception period (ages 23-28 years) and multiple
micronutrient supplementation (along with deworming) for pregnant and lactating
women (3 months after giving birth). A comprehensive package providing basic
essential knowledge to guide newlywed couples was designed and successfully
piloted in eight focus counties in 2009.
10. The three-year revision plan of the primary mathematics curriculum is now
complete. The new curriculum has been successfully piloted, with support from
UNICEF and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) in 28 schools, covering over 100 teachers and classrooms in urban,
suburban and rural areas.
11. Early learning development standards for children under 5 years of age were
revised to meet international norms with the involvement of the Ministries of
Education and Public Health and the support of international experts.
12. A life skills-based education materials kit created and distributed at the
national level provided a wide range of critical essential information benefiting
multiple audiences. The kit offers appropriate reading materials for the target
populations, contributing to an increase in reading materials available nationally.

4

13. Basic infrastructure improved in the focus counties through the construction of
latrines in schools and the rehabilitation of in-service training centres and provided
models for expansion by Government.
14. Technical assistance was provided to the Ministry of City Management to
assess sectoral requirements, plan and implement water and sanitation systems, and
train county-level technicians, resulting in improved management of water and
sanitation services.
15. The construction of gravity-fed water systems contributed to the safe and
reliable supply of water to 230,000 people. This provided a valuable, cost -effective
alternative to pumped water systems. This successful intervention can easily be
taken to scale to benefit a larger number of communities.
16. In October 2008, for the first time in 15 years, a national census was
conducted in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, with support from the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). The processes followed internationally
accepted standards. UNICEF, with the participation of the World Food Programme
(WFP), supported the Central Bureau of Statistics in undertaking the MICS in 2009.
The MICS and the census have generated new data, after a gap of many y ears, and
provided an opportunity to strengthen the capacity and knowledge of technical
government staff.
Lessons learned
17. The 2008 EPI coverage survey showed that with adequate supply of vaccines
and logistics support, the country can achieve high immunization coverage.
However, long-term sustainability remains a challenge due to the heavy dependence
on donors. The introduction of new and combined vaccines and mandatory cold chain maintenance makes this even more difficult to sustain. Continued stra tegic
alliance with GAVI and related government ownership is critical in strengthening
the immunization programme and to maintain the high coverage.
18. UNICEF-supported interventions have largely concentrated at the town level,
leaving a large size of the unreached population in the rural areas. Quality social
services need to be modelled throughout the counties, including the rural areas. This
is particularly a challenge in the mountainous and coastal areas of the country.
19. Various pilot projects in nutrition, water supply, health and education provide
ample lessons learned and contributed to the development of guidelines to scale up
these interventions.

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health

1 396

83 842

85 238

Nutrition and care

2 326

10 000

12 326

Water, sanitation and hygiene

1 396

12 500

13 896

Education

2 326

10 000

12 326

5

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Advocacy and knowledge management

930

2 500

3 430

Cross-sectoral costs

931

—

931

9 305

118 842

128 147

Total

Note: The budget is exclusive of emergency funding that will be mobilized in response to
specific emergencies.

Preparation process
20. The country programme planning exercise was carried out by UNICEF in
close consultation with the National Coordinating Committee (NCC), concerned line
ministries, United Nations agencies and other key international development
agencies. The proposed country programme is consistent with the outcomes of
consultations on the United Nations Strategic Framework (UNSF) for collaboration
between the United Nations and the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea 2011-2015, as well as the updated situation analysis of children
and women undertaken by UNICEF. The outcomes of the annual review and of the
strategic moment of reflection meeting in December 2009 were also integral to the
process. An environmental impact screening also formed an essential part of the
preparation process, given the large construction component in the WASH and
education programmes. During the various planning processes, the government
ministries, the United Nations and other development partners all played important
roles in critically assessing the lessons learned and the progress made through the
2007–2010 country programme and in validating the elements of the new country
programme. A bottlenecks analyses workshop was held in February 2009 with
participation of UNICEF regional colleagues. The findings made a significant
contribution to the planning of future strategies in the health sector.
Programme components results and strategies
21. The overall goal of the country programme is to support the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in enhancing se lf-sustaining national
capacities so that all children in the country enjoy their rights for survival,
development, protection and participation. The programme component results are
described below. Intermediate results will be developed together with the country
programme action plans.
22. The country programme seeks to enhance the development of a national policy
environment conducive for children through advocacy, increased technical support
to key ministries, building strategic alliances with organizations, such as GAVI and
Global Fund, and the adoption of innovative communication for development
strategies.
23. The programme will also enhance the generation, management and utilization
of knowledge on children for evidence-based national planning including for the
monitoring of progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.
24. To contribute to early childhood development and improved care of children
under five years, the programme will support strengthening of access to health
services with particular attention to primary- and secondary-level services.

6

Moreover, to further contribute to the reduction of maternal and neonatal deaths
from preventable and easily treatable causes, the programme will support sustenance
of high coverage of full immunization of children under the age of one for all
antigens and continue to build national capacities to scale up other high -impact
health interventions. Through the support of the Global Fund, special focus will be
given to reducing malaria and tuberculosis-related morbidity and mortality by
enhancing case management for the two diseases and delivery of insecticide -treated
nets for malaria prevention in children under five and pregnant and lactating
women.
25. The programme will contribute to improved child nutrit ion through evidencebased interventions, such as promotion of exclusive breastfeeding; complementary
feeding; micronutrient supplementation; improved childhood development care and
protection, especially in institutions; and management of severe acute mal nutrition
at community and health facility levels. The nutritional status of women of
reproductive age will be improved principally through multiple micronutrient
supplementations.
26. Learning from the past emergency experiences, UNICEF will work jointly
with other United Nations agencies and partners to strengthen the Government’s
emergency preparedness capacity and develop risk-reduction strategies for nutrition,
health, WASH and education sectors, which are critical in meeting the UNICEF core
commitments for children in emergencies. More broadly, the effects of critical food
shortages and climate change will continue to require close monitoring in order to
ensure appropriate and timely response plans are in place.
27. Access to and use of safe drinking water and sanitation will be increased, and
hygiene practices improved, thereby contributing to the reduction of morbidity and
mortality related to diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections in children. The key
strategies will be to strengthen government capacity to plan, manage and monitor
improved water supply and sanitation services and to scale up service provision in
county towns and rural areas, including health, education and childcare institutions.
28. Quality of education will be improved through strengthened national capacity
in education planning and management, introduction of new approaches in teaching
and learning methodologies, curriculum improvement and strategic interventions in
early childhood care and development. Life skills-based education will be
strengthened at national and grass-roots levels. Education and sanitation facilities
will be rehabilitated and constructed in focus counties. Innovative interventions will
be piloted in focus counties to serve as possible models for expansion in other areas
by the Government and other partners.
29. The country programme aims to achieve key results using the following
strategies in close cooperation with the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea:
(a) UNICEF will consolidate and maximize the synergy between service
delivery, capacity building and advocacy interventions. It will continue to adopt an
evidence-based approach and expand its geographic and substantive focus in th e
new country programme.
(b) Advocacy for increased government budget allocation to social sectors
for children will become an important strategic policy approach and key overarching
component of the new country programme. Data generation will facilitate evidence based social policy discussions on priority problems. UNICEF support to

7

programming in a limited number of focus counties will provide essential input to
advocacy and policy efforts while paving the way for further rollout and potential
scaling-up for national replication. UNICEF will advocate on a plat form of
inclusivity and strengthen the capacity of ministries to deliver quality social services
to all children, taking into consideration special needs and contexts.
(c) The formulation and implementation of innovative communication for
development strategies will form an integral part of the next country programme and
contribute towards systematic capacity building in the country, greater demand for
services and increased and efficient results for children.
30. Given the strategic importance of gender in the development process, this
country programme will ensure that the gender perspective is mainstreamed.
31. UNICEF will continue working with other United Nations agencies in joint
programming by geographical areas or in sectoral programmes to have syne rgistic
impact on the women and children.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
32. There is no United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Instead, the country programme was
developed within the context of the new UNSF 2011-2015, and is consistent with
the national priorities of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Relationship to international priorities
33. The new country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and other humanitarian principles, and follows a human rights -based
approach to programming, focusing on children and their families. Priorit y
interventions will contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the
related Millennium Declaration and A World Fit for Children. The new programme
will contribute to the five focus areas of the UNICEF medium -term strategic plan.
Programme components
34. UNICEF seeks to consolidate and build on the results of the previous country
programme and the processes for achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
The strategic focus will be on policy advocacy, systems building and process
improvements, including qualitative improvements to services and knowledge
management.
35. Advocacy and knowledge management. This programme component will
advocate for integrated policies to reduce vulnerability gaps, address gender
mainstreaming, and support childcare in institutions and children with special needs.
Moreover, it will emphasize high-quality child-related analytic research, including
follow-up to MICS 2009, and strengthen sharing of lessons learned with appropriate
capacity development for long-term planning through focused and integrated county
plans between programmes and local planning.
36. The key expected result is strengthened government capacity to generate,
collect, analyse and use data to inform policy and decision makers.

8

37. The programme, in line with the UNSF, will increase its support to all
government partners and seek to improve sector planning through various capacity building activities, including strengthening of data analysis, technical assistance for
strategic sector planning, results-based monitoring and the reinforcement of a
culture of accountability. Development of a stronger internal results -based
monitoring system will require improvements in the roles, capacities and skills for
more informed programme planning and social policy development, including
integrated interventions and piloting policies/guidelines at the focus-county level.
Knowledge sharing through greater international exposure will be a cornerstone of
this strategy and will enable the adoption of good practices o f other countries in the
region and forging of a regional institutional network.
38. The main government partner will be the NCC. UNICEF will continue to work
jointly with all United Nations and other development partners and relevant line
ministries.
39. Health. The component will focus on increasing the availability and utilization
of quality health services, with particular attention given to primary - and secondarylevel health facilities. The programme will also incorporate the Global Fund’s
support on enhancing the prevention and case management of malaria and
tuberculosis, including increased case detection and procurement and distribution of
insecticide-treated nets for malaria prevention and improved treatment and other
supplies. Through the continuum of care approach, UNICEF will support the
introduction and expansion in all focus counties of health-related key caring
practices, such as the Community Integrated Management of Childhood Illness
strategy, to address major diseases (diarrhoea and pneumo nia, among others) in line
with the UNSF social development outcome and directly supporting the
achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6.
40. The following key results are expected to be achieved by 2015: (a) capacity of
national and local governments strengthened to formulate and implement relevant
policies and results-oriented strategies to manage the health system nationwide;
(b) capacity of national and local government strengthened, increasing access to and
delivery of quality basic health services for children as well as utilization of quality
maternal and newborn care by women; (c) morbidity and mortality related to
malaria and tuberculosis are reduced in affected areas.
41. The key partner will be the Ministry of Public Health and will implement joint
programmes with other health development partners including WHO, UNFPA and
International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC).
42. Nutrition and care. The component will support the Government’s efforts to
reduce child and maternal undernutrition, in line with the global targets of Goals 1,
4 and 5. It also supports the UNSF nutrition outcome, aimed at improving the
nutritional status of women and children. The programme will focus on nurseries,
baby homes and household levels in focus counties, through evidence-based and
high-impact interventions with early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive
breastfeeding, adequate and safe complementary feeding, and improved child care
practices. It will also continue supporting micronutrients supplement ation and
anaemia control in infants, young children and women of childbearing age,
including pregnant and lactating women.
43. The key expected results by 2015 are the following: (a) child and maternal
nutrition will be improved at local and national leve ls; (b) behavioural and care
practices at institutional and household level will be improved in focus counties

9

(c) Government capacity in emergency preparedness and response, including long term strategies for risk reduction, particularly in nutrition, wil l be developed.
44. The key partners will be the Institute of Child Nutrition, Ministry of Public
Health, as well as Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation, WHO, UNFPA,
WFP and IFRC.
45. Education. The component aims to improve quality of education natio nally.
The main strategy at the national level will involve capacity development in
education planning and management; supporting the development of national
standards and frameworks for early learning and child -friendly primary schools; and
expanding new approaches in teacher training and instructional methodologies, life
skills-based education and curriculum and textbook revision. In addition, the
education strategy will introduce innovative interventions and models in the focus
counties related to WASH, improved classroom facilities, learning materials and
multimedia approaches, as well as to school-based management, which can be
expanded to broader areas by the Government and other partners.
46. The following are key expected results by 2015: (a) nationa l and local
government capacities strengthened to improve the quality of education nationwide,
(b) national capacity in sector planning and data management enhanced; and
(c) capacity of national and local government strengthened to increase access to and
delivery of quality basic education for children.
47. The programme supports the UNSF social development outcome and global
targets of Goals 2, 4 and 6 through efforts aimed at improving the quality of
education and friendliness of school environment. The government partner will be
the Ministry of Education. UNICEF will continue to work with UNESCO and other
development partners on joint initiatives.
48. Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). The component will be scaled up to
reach county, town and rural areas with emphasis on gravity-flow schemes and other
lower cost solutions together with water-safety planning approaches; increased
access to improved sanitation in household and child institutions by promoting
environmentally sustainable and appropriate solutions; improved hygiene practices
through the use of effective and critical hygiene messages linked with health,
nutrition and education programmes.
49. The following are the expected key results of the WASH programme by 2015:
(a) capacity of national and local government strengthened to formulate relevant and
effective WASH policies and strategies; and (b) capacity of national and local
government strengthened to increase access to and delivery of quality water and
sanitation services for children.
50. The main implementing partners will continue to be the Ministry of City
Management in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Health for water quality
and hygiene promotion and the Ministry of Education for WASH in schools. The
programme will work closely with the County People’s Committees and implement
joint interventions with WHO, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations Environment Programme, IFRC and other
non-governmental partners.
51. Cross-sectoral costs will include the expenses of programme and support
staff, as well as technical assistance and office costs.

10

Major partnerships
52. Major implementation partners are the Ministry of Public Health, the Ministry
of City Management, the Ministry of Education and the Census Bureau. The country
programme will be implemented in close collaboration with the United Nations and
other development agencies working in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Joint programming is currently undertaken in immunization, food fortificat ion,
WASH, safe motherhood and education with UNDP, UNFPA, WFP, WHO and
UNESCO; additional opportunities for even greater coherence will be identified
though the UNSF. Strategic partnerships will be forged with other key funding
partners, involving them in programme monitoring, reviews and assessments.
Discussions will be held with the Government of the Republic of Korea for long term support. The working relationship with the Global Fund and the United
Nations Office for Project Services will be strengthened. The NCC for UNICEF will
be an integral partner in the new country programme.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
53. The NCC will be the main coordinating body for programme implementation.
A five-year country programme action plan and related work plans will be
developed; these may be revised as a consequence of annual reviews, evaluations
and changes in priority needs or the funding situation. The third annual review,
scheduled for late 2013, will serve as a midterm review and will fee d into the
preparation of the next programme cycle to begin in 2016.
54. UNICEF will use a results-based approach and undertake joint field
monitoring visits with other United Nations partners, programme reviews and
assessments following established UNSF guidelines. Investments will also be made
to train concerned personnel and to provide technical assistance to establish and
implement national monitoring and surveillance systems.

11

