Pacific Island Countries
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for the Pacific Island
Countries (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.7) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8
June 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

2

12-30269

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The multi-country programme of the Pacific Island Countries 1 faces unique
programming challenges. Geographically dispersed over 30 million square
kilometres of the Pacific Ocean, the countries of the Pacific subregion are culturally
diverse and suffer from low human and institutional capacity and high
environmental vulnerability. These challenges are embodied in high costs for
development, high risk of damage from disasters and slow progress towards
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and other targets.
2.
The global economic crisis has placed considerable strain on families, and the
governments of these import-dependent countries struggle to ensure sustainable and
equitable delivery of services. Particularly vulnerable to climate change, the Pacific
Island Countries are suffering more frequently from natural disasters. They face
potential devastation from sea-level rise, especially in the atoll archipelagic States
and the coastal areas of the volcanic islands. Almost a quarter of Pacific islanders
live in urban centres and half of the countries already have majority urban
populations. Continuing rapid urbanization poses significant challenges for
infrastructure, disaster preparedness and ensuring equitable development in
peri-urban areas.
3.
Despite official development assistance estimated at seven times the average
for developing countries, strengthened capacities of regional organizations in the
Pacific to improve delivery of results at national level and increasingly coordinated
development cooperation, many States in the subregion have made insufficient
progress to reduce poverty, achieve gender inequality, improve maternal health and
realize development that is environmentally sustainable. I n addition, adolescents
and young people aged 15 to 24, who comprise 20 per cent of the population, often
are deprived of education, health and employment opportunities.
4.
Available evidence shows that disparities are large and growing between and
within countries. The main drivers of inequity are poverty, geographic location,
gender, disability and external shocks, such as economic volatility and natural
disasters. Formal social protection remains weak; vulnerable families are being
driven further into poverty by declining remittances, recurring disasters and cultural
shifts resulting from urbanization.
5.
The Pacific Island Countries have made progress towards the health -related
Millennium Development Goals: under-five mortality rates in the subregion have
declined from 14-87 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 9-49 per 1,000 live births in
2010. Notably, only four countries (Kiribati, Micronesia, Nauru and Tuvalu) had
under-five mortality rates exceeding 30 per 1,000 live births in 2010, while in 1990,
only four countries (Cook Islands, Niue, Samoa and Tonga) had under -five mortality
rates below that figure. This progress has been achieved despite inadequate budgets,
unreliable health information systems, supply bottlenecks and difficulties in
balancing provision of preventive and curative services. These countries face the
double burden of undernutrition and infectious diseases on the one hand and
overnutrition and non-communicable diseases on the other. Progress in reducing
__________________
1

The Pacific Island Countries programme comprises 14 States: Cook Islands, Fiji, Federated
States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

3

under-five mortality has highlighted disproportionately large numbers of
preventable newborn deaths. Maternal mortality remains unacceptably high,
suggesting disturbing levels of morbidity, considering that for every death an
estimated 30 women suffer significant disability.
6.
Notable progress has been made towards achieving universal primary
education, with all but three countries having attendance rates in the 90 per cent
range. However, a high proportion of children remain unable to read or write upon
completion of the primary school cycle. Investment in early childhood education is
insufficient and inequitable due to large disparities based on geographic location,
economic status and disability. School sanitation, at less than 70 per cent, is
insufficient, with a particular impact on girls, among whom higher drop-out rates
are noted for young adolescents. Six of the 14 countries have achieved primary
school enrolment rates of over 90 per cent, but these gains are at risk of decline in
four countries — Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of
Micronesia due to the effects of the economic downturn. Progress is mixed in
completion of basic education, with inadequate retention rates in seven countries
and high repetition rates in the early grades. Gender parity has largely been achieved
in primary and secondary education, although gaps remain regarding technical and
vocational training.
7.
The prevalence of HIV in the Pacific Island Countries remains low, although
surveillance is inadequate to ascertain the precise status. Very high teenage
pregnancy rates (over 10 per cent in Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Solomon
Islands and Vanuatu), pervasive gender-based violence (over 70 per cent in most
countries) and high prevalence of non-HIV sexually transmitted infections (over
20 per cent in young people below 25) in many of the countries suggest a real
danger of a rapid increase in HIV. Other drivers of HIV risk and vulnerability
include transactional sex, mobility and alcohol and drug abuse.
8.
Protection of children and women is a continuing concern. Over 70 per cent of
caregivers have admitted to physically harming children. Research shows that two
of every three women have experienced physical or sexual violence perpetrated by
an intimate partner. A recent study in Solomon Islands indicates that women who
experience abuse are 4.5 times more likely to abuse their children. In Fiji, Kiribati,
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, new laws and policies have given government and
civil society organizations a mandate and framework to address violence, abuse,
exploitation and neglect of children. The result has been expansion of services to
detect and care for victims and community action against violence and abuse.
However, other countries lag behind, with limited legislat ion and few systems or
structures to protect children and women.
9.
All Pacific Island Countries have ratified the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. All but Palau and Tonga have ratified the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women. However, only Fiji, Federated States
of Micronesia, Nauru and Vanuatu have acceded to the Optional Protocols on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. Only Solomon Islands has acceded to the Optional
Protocol on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Complying with reporting obligations under these treaties has
proved extremely burdensome for the small administrations of the se countries.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
10. Previous cooperation contributed to gains for children through evidence informed advocacy; capacity development for realizing the provisio ns of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child; generation of child -focused baseline data
needed for strategic planning; equity-focused analysis of social indicators and
budgets; documentation and sharing of good practices; communication for
development to increase demand for services and promote social transformation;
specification of minimum quality standards for sectoral programmes; and building a
culture of evaluation in development programming.
11. The scope and degree of UNICEF engagement was prioritized using a tiered
framework based on country situations, needs and resources. Three countries
(Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) were identified as ‘tier one’, needing
extensive assistance; five ‘tier two’ countries (Fiji, Marshall Islands, Federat ed
States of Micronesia, Samoa and Tuvalu) received support for policy development
and capacity and system building; and the remaining six ‘tier -three’ countries (Cook
Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Tokelau and Tonga) received support in advocating for
child-friendly policies.
12. Health and sanitation initiatives have been instrumental in consolidating the
progress made towards achievement of the health-related Millennium Development
Goals. In collaboration with partners of the Pacific Immunization Programm e
Strengthening initiative, UNICEF contributed to sustaining polio -free status and,
since 2008, measles-free status. Integrated maternal and child interventions (vitamin A,
deworming tablets, birth registration and hand washing) were added during measles
supplemental immunization activities and as part of regular Child Health Days in
four countries. Modules on Integrated Management of Childhood Illness were
adapted to include infants up to two months of age, and an integrated prototype
service model for mother and child health was developed.
13. The 2010 Pacific Food Summit, supported in partnership with the World
Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, emphasized the benefits of nutrition security of children and women.
Progress was made in promoting child care practices, including through the training
of over 1,300 health workers in the integrated delivery of mother and newborn
interventions. Four countries (Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu) joined the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, with 30 (out of 36) hospitals
receiving accreditation. Maternal and newborn care policies and guidelines were
updated and intensive care units providing special care for premature or ill
newborns were set up in Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.
14. Water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH) was enhanced in schools and
communities in Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. UNICEF supported
governmental and non-governmental organizations to celebrate Global Hand
Washing Days in Fiji and Solomon Islands. As the lead for the WASH cluster,
UNICEF strengthened capacities and partnerships for an effective emergency
response to communities affected by over 10 natural disasters, including
earthquakes, tsunamis, cyclones and floods.

5

15. Cooperation in education helped to expand access to quality primary
education, with particular attention to four countries. Over 12,000 students in the
Solomon Islands benefited from the rebuilding of 160 schools following the 2007
tsunami. Previously excluded children gained access to primary education following
the abolition of school fees in Solomon Islands in 2009 and Vanuatu in 2010.
UNICEF supported the elaboration of national minimum quality standards for
primary schools to systematize the investment of school grants and serve as a
platform for greater equity in resource allocation across schools. Education clusters
led by ministries of education were established in Kiribati, Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu, in collaboration with Save the Children-Australia.
16. To strengthen teachers’ commitment to quality teaching, a Pacific Teachers’
Code of Ethics was developed and endorsed by all teachers’ associations. The
programme also initiated a number of sector policies through active en gagement
with sector-wide education programmes and leveraged funding through pooled
funding arrangements.
17. UNICEF contributed to national and regional research on provision of early
childhood education and establishment of related policies, standards an d curricula.
Increased regional attention led to the establishment of a Pacific Early Childhood
Care and Education Council, which will support policy formulation and monitor
service standards across the subregion.
18. Through advocacy, expanded partnerships and technical assistance, progress
was made in improving HIV-related regional and national policies and guidelines,
elaborating minimum standards and developing training modules for prevention of
parent-to-child transmission of HIV (PPTCT), HIV testing and counselling, and
youth-friendly health services. Over 270 service providers were trained to provide
quality sexual reproductive health and HIV services through 52 youth -friendly
health service facilities in 10 countries, with the joint support of the Se cretariat of
the Pacific Community and the United Nations Population Fund. However, the
outcomes and impacts on children and women remain difficult to measure due to
insufficient data.
19. Findings of UNICEF-supported knowledge, attitudes and practices studies
were used to develop and disseminate messages and to support a television drama
aired in seven countries on HIV and AIDS-related issues faced by youth. The
Vanuatu youth hotline provides information, counselling and referral for
adolescents.
20. Research conducted to develop baseline evidence on child protection identified
barriers and bottlenecks in addressing violence, abuse and exploitation of children.
It also enabled establishment and strengthening of systems to enhance the protective
environment for children through legislative reform, effective policies and better
functioning of child and family welfare services in four countries. For the first time
in the Pacific, policies outline roles and responsibilities of stakeholders for
protection of children. Due to concerted strategic communication activities, media
coverage of child protection issues regionally and nationally increased steadily over
the period. In addition to positive family and community changes being reported
through the participatory ‘most significant change’ methodology, which focuses on
illustrative stories of significant change at local level, child protection issues
emerged more clearly in national and sector development plans.

6

21. UNICEF support for policy, advocacy, planning and evaluation contributed to
the development of new policies for youth in Kiribati, Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu. At the regional level, advocacy for a Pacific youth strategy led to
commitments by national leaders in the Pacific Islands Forum (a political gro uping
of 16 independent and self-governing states). Sentinel site monitoring, supported in
six countries, helped governments to monitor the impact of the global economic
crisis on children and women, informing policy response, while several key
UNICEF-supported studies led to greater commitment to social policy and social
protection measures.
22. A six-country subregional meeting on legislative reform and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child took place in 2008, catalysing processes to strengthen
national advisory committees on children. It also improved monitoring and reporting
on implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in the region.
Subnational data examining inequities based on geography, income, gender, age and
disability were highlighted in Atlases of Social Indicators, produced in partnership
with government departments and central statistics offices.
23. In partnership with other United Nations agencies, UNICEF provided technical
support to national planning, monitoring and evaluation systems in Kiribati,
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Joint monitoring of UNICEF -supported interventions
in selected subnational areas with convergent multisectoral programming in these
countries contributed to strengthened capacities of partners. ‘Mos t significant
change’ training and collection of stories was conducted annually with communities
as a component of monitoring behavioural change.
24. Evidence-based strategic communication processes and initiatives were
supported through a combination of advocacy, communication for development,
knowledge management and partnership initiatives. These include high -level
regional advocacy to address rising child poverty in the region; communication
focusing on WASH, child protection and HIV and AIDS; creation of a knowledge
network on children; and establishment of corporate partnerships to help make
schools more child-friendly.
Lessons learned
25. The previous cooperation cycle introduced programmes in education,
protection and social policy while expanding cooperation in WASH promotion. The
evidence base was strengthened, due to the UNICEF emphasis on data integrity and
use with clear baselines, robust monitoring frameworks and systematic
documentation of results. This improvement led partners to increase their
commitments, especially for child-sensitive country and regional analysis of poverty
and equity.
26. The grouping of countries in the three-tier structure enabled UNICEF to
prioritize support across all countries in relation to the development burd en.
However, more ways are needed to leverage resources effectively for children in
tier-two countries and to make effective use of partnerships for children in tier -three
countries.
27. The 2010 midterm review recommended acceleration of programme
convergence and the integration of services at the subnational level in tier -one
countries. It called for more emphasis on the most vulnerable groups and scaling -up

7

of models to contribute significantly to the realization of children’s rights in those
countries.
28. Expanded and stronger UNICEF engagement in sector-wide approaches, aid
effectiveness mechanisms and regional and national partnerships supported
leveraging of resources and results for children, especially in education, health and
HIV and AIDS.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health and sanitation

5 100

12 500

17 600

Education

3 300

10 000

13 300

HIV and AIDS

3 700

5 000

8 700

Child protection

3 500

11 500

15 000

Policy, advocacy, planning and evaluation

6 300

2 500

8 800

Cross-sectoral

5 925

2 500

8 425

Total

27 825

44 000

71 825

Preparation process
29. The UNICEF programme was developed following preparation of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2013 -2017. United Nations
country teams based in Fiji and Samoa commenced preparation of the UNDAF in
May 2011 with a joint priority-setting retreat. After extensive consultations with
each of the 14 countries, a strategic retreat was held to bring together regional
intergovernmental organizations, governments, regional and national partners,
development partners and donors. It led to consensus in focusing on five priority
areas: (a) disaster risk management, environmental sustainability and climate
change; (b) inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction; (c) gender equality;
(d) basic services; and (e) governance. The UNDAF contains regional and country level results matrices in support of the United Nations shared mission to promote
sustainable development and inclusive economic growth to address the social,
economic and environmental vulnerabilities affecting society at all levels and to
ensure human security.
Programme components, results and strategies
30. UNICEF envisions fulfilment of the rights of all children in the Pacific to
survival, development, protection and participation. It will continue to contribute to
the achievement of these objectives through strategic support to service delivery,
capacity building and advocacy, in cooperation with partners. Accordingly, the
overall goal of the multi-country programme is to support the governments of all
Pacific Island Countries in progressively realizing child rights in acc ordance with
national development strategies, the UNDAF, Millennium Development Goals,

8

Millennium Declaration, the Pacific Plan (the master strategy for regional
development endorsed by leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum in 2005 to promote
economic growth, sustainable development, good governance and security) and
related regional priorities and strategies. The multi-country programme reflects the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan.
31. The programme will raise the profile of child rights in regional polic y debates
and strategies through concrete technical support to national capacity and services.
The tiered approach to programming generally remains in place, with one
adjustment — moving Nauru to tier two, because of the relative development
stagnation the country has experienced in recent years. The objective is to support
the achievement of key results at scale for children in the three tier -one countries
(Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) while aiding strategic policy engagement
and system building in the six tier-two countries (Fiji, Marshall Islands, Federated
States of Micronesia, Nauru, Samoa and Tuvalu) and continuing to assist policy
advocacy in the five tier-three countries. Documentation and evaluation of
supported initiatives in tier-one countries, and in selected cases in tier-two and tierthree countries, will demonstrate impact and allow scaling -up of services at national
level. It will also encourage sharing of good practices to support evidence -informed
policies and strategies. Pacific-wide programming will be pursued through
cooperation and capacity development with regional institutions.
32.

The programme will be guided by the following strategies:

(a) Evidence-based advocacy and leverage to support development and
implementation of laws and policies that address child rights and inequalities;
(b) Capacity development at national and subnational levels through
promotion of human rights-based programming, gender and youth mainstreaming,
and results-based planning, management, monitoring and evaluation;
(c) Data generation and analysis and use of lessons learned to influence
policies and improve service delivery;
(d) Partnerships with and for children and young people, as well as with
major development partners and regional institutions, along with operationalization
of aid effectiveness principles;
(e) Community engagement, social mobilization and communication for
behaviour and social change, focusing on care and improved practices; and
(f) Capacity strengthening in emergency preparedness and response, disaster
risk reduction and climate change adaptation across all programme areas.
(g) Cross-cutting attention to evidence-for-action, prevention, protection,
inclusive education and participation for children with disability.
Programme components
33. Health, nutrition and sanitation. This programme component will contribute
to accelerated reduction of neonatal, infant and under -five child mortality; improved
maternal health with equity; improved access to equitable and sustai nable safe water
and sanitation; and improved hygiene practices. It will address major killers of
children (neonatal conditions, pneumonia, diarrhoea and malnutrition) and risks to
maternal health through identification of supply bottlenecks and advocacy a nd

9

support for their removal. The programme will also work to demonstrate and
document good practices and, through partnerships and leveraging of resources,
support their scale-up in Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu.
34. Key strategies will include expanding and leveraging health sector -wide
approaches in Samoa and Solomon Islands; joint programme arrangements in Fiji,
Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru and Vanuatu;
capacity development at national and subnational levels; and community
mobilization for behaviour change in the context of revitalized primary health care.
The programme will build on current and emerging partnerships and appro aches,
such as the Framework for Action for Food Security Pacific, the Pacific
Immunization Programme Strengthening and the Pacific WASH Coalition.
35. Education. This programme component will contribute to raising the number
of children who participate in early childhood education and basic education across
Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. The programme will invest in
two result areas: equitable early childhood education and quality basic education
services for improved learning outcomes. To promote better outcomes (both
academic and non-academic) in primary education and beyond, the programme will
support demonstration initiatives on early childhood education for children from
communities facing socio-economic and geographic disadvantages. The Pacificwide Early Childhood Care and Education partnership will undertake research and
communication initiatives to increase budget allocations from the private and public
sectors.
36. The development and implementation of systems for national mi nimum quality
standards, drawing from the UNICEF global experience in child -friendly schools,
will ensure that every student benefits from a safe school environment that is
conducive to learning. Through introduction of school-based management
programmes, grant schemes will more effectively target factors known to affect
children’s participation and academic achievement. The programme will support the
strengthening of non-formal education systems through aid to policy development
and sharing of best practices in adolescent education. In collaboration with
development partners, notably Australia and New Zealand, the programme will seek
to increase the proportion of children with adequate literacy and numeracy skills
through early grade literary and numeracy programmes. Continued engagement by
UNICEF with joint education sector programmes and pooled funding partnership
arrangements will be a key strategy to achieve sustainable, expanded results.
37. HIV and AIDS. This programme component will promote access to relevant
information, skills and services to protect populations at higher risk from HIV
infection and to reduce its impact, and will focus on two areas: (a) strategic
information and data; and (b) HIV prevention services for pregnant women and
adolescents. It will advocate for development and use of national plans in line with
the Pacific Regional Strategy on HIV/AIDS, closely linked with actions in relevant
sectors, and will provide technical assistance for this purpose. The programme will
also strengthen the capacities of national and subnational partners in Fiji, Kiribati,
Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to collect, analyse, disseminate and use HIV
surveillance and strategic data for effective responses and for accurate and timely
national and global reporting.

10

38. Responding to the global call for elimination of paediatric AIDS and the Asia Pacific consensus on linking this effort with elimination of congenital syphilis,
UNICEF will support governments of five countries to expand PPTCT services.
This will involve scaling up HIV testing of pregnant women and their partners;
integrating PPTCT into maternal, neonatal and child health services; and early
detection and treatment of infected mothers and exposed infants. Demand for
services will be further enhanced through strategic communication. UNICEF will
continue to support system strengthening to increase access to HIV prevention
services for adolescents in and out of school, with emphasis on those most
marginalized.
39. Child protection. This component will continue to engage a broad range of
partners for the progressive advancement of a protective environment for children
that is increasingly free from violence, abuse and exploitation. All Pacific Island
Countries will be supported in areas of strategic policy and system development
processes. The programme will pursue two key results. First, child protection
systems — justice and police, child and family social services, the health and
education sectors as well as the communities themselves — will provide goodquality, accessible services to prevent and respond to violence, abuse and
exploitation of all children at all times. Second, parents, caregivers and children will
be empowered to demonstrate skills, knowledge and behaviours, ensuring that
children grow up in caring homes, communities and schools that are increasingly
free from violence, abuse and exploitation.
40. In relation to the legal and regulatory system, the focus will be on ensuring
implementation and enforcement of newly amended or passed laws and continued
support to areas where legislative reform is still required. To aid child and family
welfare and services, the programme will continue to build on positive cultural and
traditional practices and local resources to ensure sustainability and economic
viability. Key to success will be greater collaboration and coordination between
government departments, including the social welfare, justice, education and health
sectors.
41. Policy, advocacy, planning and evaluation. This programme component
focuses on evidence, advocacy and policies for the equitable realization of child
rights and the Millennium Development Goals. The programme will advocate with
ministries of planning and finance on child poverty, equity and budgeting. It will
also strengthen government capacities to analyse data on children and women and to
better identify and understand disparities. The early-warning sentinel system will
continue to monitor and develop evidence on the impact of economic shocks and
track vulnerabilities due to disaster risk, climate change, migration and
urbanization, in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
Monitoring and research findings will be used to advocate with ministries of
finance, planning and environment and with parliaments. The objective is to make
policies and budgets more child sensitive, with a view to reducing inequities and
building resilience for children and their families. Special emphasis will be given to
establishment or strengthening of social protection systems in selected countries in
partnership with other United Nations agencies and development partners.
42. The programme will promote strengthened governance and participation by
building capacity for monitoring and reporting on the Convention on the Rights of
the Child in all countries. It will also work to strengthen implementation of the

11

Convention through support to relevant child and youth policy development in
selected countries and at the regional level. Young people’s rights and capacities to
participate will be enhanced through support to regional youth networks, with a
focus on the Pacific priorities of gender equality and climate change.
43. The programme’s strong focus on evidence-based advocacy and communication
will continue. It will work by engaging governments, communities and the media to
mobilize awareness and partnerships to reduce inequities and vulnerabilities.
Capacities will be built for strategic communication and social dialogue to enhance
results for children. Support will be provided to enhance monitoring and evaluation
to reduce disparities for children and women and identify effective models for
scaling up.
44. Cross-sectoral. Regular resources and a portion of other resources will
contribute to management costs of the multi-country programme management,
including the UNICEF contribution to the United Nations country team and to joint
presence offices. Addressing the increasing vulnerability of the Pacific to weather related events and climate change, disaster risk reduction and emergency
preparedness and response will be integrated into all programme components and
linked with national disaster management offices as well as United Nations and
regional bodies. Through these arrangements, UNICEF and its partners will seek to
reduce country and community risk and prepare for and respond to emergencies in a
coordinated manner. The aim is to mitigate the impact on children and women and
ensure a rapid return to normalcy.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
45. The multi-country programme is aligned with major Pacific-wide plans and
strategies and national development strategic plans of all Pacific Island Countries. It
reflects a weighting framework that prioritizes interventions relative to each
country’s development burden and gaps in the realization of child rights. The
programme will also contribute to strengthening community resilience and coping
mechanisms to deal with the effects of climate change and natural disasters.
46. UNICEF will contribute to the five UNDAF priority areas and their associated
outcomes as follows:
(a) Disaster risk management, environmental sustainability and climate
change: by supporting United Nations agencies and partners to mainstream child centred, gender-responsive environmental sustainability into regional and national
policies, planning frameworks and programmes, and through support to
strengthening community resilience, including through improved water and
sanitation services;
(b) Inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction: by supporting the
development, implementation and evaluation of child -centred and pro-poor national
strategic plans, policies and programmes that address social and economic
exclusion;
(c) Gender equality: by supporting the strengthening of protective systems
through policies, legislation and programmes to respond to and prevent exploitation
and violence against women and children, in line with international standards;

12

(d) Basic services: by assisting the development of evidence-based policies
and enabling environments and by strengthening social sector capacities at all levels
to deliver affordable, quality, basic services with an emphasis on equality, inclusion
and access;
(e) Governance: by enhancing the capacity of national governance and
accountability systems, supporting decentralized governance of social services and
advocating for consideration of women’s and children’s rights in decision -making at
all levels.
Relationship to international priorities
47. The programme will help the Pacific Island Countries to reach the Millennium
Development Goals and to fulfil promises made in the Millennium Declaration. It
will do so primarily by supporting efforts to reduce child and maternal mortality;
achieve universal primary education; promote gender equality and empower women;
combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases; and protect vulnerable children
and women. UNICEF will support Pacific governments to mainstream disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation into their plans and programmes. This will
help to ensure that the rights of children and young people remain central to these
countries’ efforts for sustainable development.
Major partnerships
48. Notwithstanding the challenges related to geographic distance — with key
partners located in five different countries — UNICEF will strengthen collaboration
with development partners, including the Asian Development Bank, Australian
Agency for International Development, New Zealand Aid Programme, Japan
International Cooperation Agency, the European Union and the World Bank.
49. Relationships with regional bodies, such as the Pacific Islands Forum
Secretariat and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, will be further
strengthened to promote South-South cooperation. UNICEF will join regional
partners in knowledge networks to enhance research and monitoring of the
Millennium Development Goals and sustainable development. New strategic
alliances will be sought with academic institutions, including teacher training
colleges, the University of South Pacific, Fiji School of Medicine and other Pacific
institutions.
50. UNICEF will maintain close partnerships with relevant ministries and
provincial and district administrations, along with women’s, youth and media
groups, including national advisory committees for children. At national and
subnational levels, UNICEF will mobilize and cooperate with NGO consortia, faith based organizations and community groups.
51. UNICEF will continue its engagement in sector-wide approaches in Kiribati,
Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu and its collaboration with pertinent sector
programmes or initiatives in other countries. Through the UNDAF, the programme
will maintain close linkages with other United Nations agencies, including through
strengthened joint programming in all strategic areas of the multi -country
programme. Emphasis will be given to data and evidence, youth, gender and climate
change.

13

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
52. Results monitoring will rely on strong coordination with national partners
through the field offices and collaboration with United Nations agencies and
regional organizations to support national planning, statistics strengthening and aid
effectiveness. A five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan,
complemented by annual plans, will be developed. The Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan will identify requirements for research and studies, surveys,
monitoring systems and evaluations linked to the key results and core indicators
presented in the summary results matrix. Subnational monitoring systems will be
developed and supported. The UNICEF field presence, United Nations Delivering as-One processes and the United Nations joint presence offices will assure better
coordination with governments and improved United Nations coherence.
Programme coordination, management, monitoring and annual reviews will be led
by the ministries of planning and finance or their equivalent in each country.
Workplans will be developed and updated jointly with governments and other
partners based on recommendations from annual reviews. UNICEF will participate
in country-led reviews and consultations involving the United Nations and regional
organizations. The midterm reviews of the UNDAF and the UNICEF multi-country
programme, to be implemented in 2015, will serve as a basis to assess progress and
develop future directions for UNICEF cooperation for children.

14

