Pakistan
Common country programme document
2013-2017

The draft common country programme document for
Pakistan (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.38) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2012 second regular
session (11-14 September 2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 8 February 2013.

Contents
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Situation analysis ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Past cooperation and lessons learned .......................................................................................................... 8
Proposed programme .................................................................................................................................. 9
Programme management, monitoring and evaluation ................................................................................ 13

Annex
UNICEF results and resources framework for Pakistan, 2013 -2017 ...................................................................... 15

2

Introduction
1.
UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF have developed a common country programme
document (CCPD) for 2013-2017 and complementary agency-specific results and
resources frameworks. The aim of the three organizations is to further promote
United Nations coherence, enhance joint programming, strengthen effective delivery
of support to Pakistan and accelerate a joint United Nations approach to “Delivering
as one”.
2.
Following Pakistan’s previous “One United Nations” programme (2009 -2012),
which was one of the eight “Delivering as one” pilots, the new CCPD reflects the
strategic priorities and key results in a “second-generation” One United Nations’
programme, based on the three organizations’ comparative advantages. It offers the
three organizations and their respective executive boards an opportunity to review
cross-cutting issues, strengthen synergies, identify gaps and remove duplications,
thereby enhancing efficiency. The CCPD also reduces the review burden for the
Government and enables the participating organizations to show complementarities
and harmonization, as well as to articulate areas of cooperation. It has been
formulated in close consultation with the Government, other development partners
and provincial governments, so that it is aligned with national and provi ncial
priorities. It is guided by internationally agreed development targets, including the
Millennium Development Goals, as well as United Nations treaties and other
international instruments.

I. Situation analysis
3.
Pakistan is the sixth most populous country in the world, with a current
population of 177.1 million, growing at an annual rate of 2.05 per cent. 1 The
country has made positive strides in recent years to address its development
challenges. The Government’s Framework for Economic Growth (2011) seeks to
respond to these challenges through a structural transformation of the economy,
including through productivity enhancement, effective governance, competitive
markets, creative cities, and enhanced youth and community engagement.
Development plans of provinces/areas mirror these goals at the local level, including
in specific sector plans that will need to be translated into concrete interventions.
4.
In recent years, Pakistan has experienced macroeconomic stress, fiscal
retrenchment and balance-of-payment difficulties. While the economy has
stabilized, the macroeconomic situation remains under pressure. The global
financial crisis, rising food and fuel prices, challenges in meeting energy demands
and recurring natural disasters have had a significant economic impact. The real
gross domestic product growth rate, which has historically averaged 5 per cent per
annum, has averaged less than 3 per cent since 2007 -2008. It is expected to average
3.6 per cent in 2011-2012. 2
5.
A challenging security situation and multiple crises have affected people’s
lives and livelihoods and resulted in loss of development gains. Affected families
and hosting communities need continued humanitarian support. In addition, the
__________________
1
2

Economic Survey of Pakistan 2010-2011.
Ibid.

3

families voluntarily returning to their areas require early recovery support to restore
their livelihoods and community infrastructure. Moreover, Pakistan is also home to
the largest refugee population in the world, with 1.7 million registered Afghan
refugees and 1 million unregistered currently living in the country. The protracted
presence of refugees adds to the development challenges of the hosting and affected
areas and poses additional challenges to attaining durable solutions.
6.
While the 2011 Human Development Report notes an improving tr end in the
nation’s Human Development Index value since 1981, Pakistan is ranked 145 out of
187 countries. Poverty incidence decreased from 34.5 per cent in 2000 -2001 to
22.35 per cent in 2005-2006, the latest year for which official figures are available.
Poverty is high in rural and remote areas with limited social services and economic
opportunities.
7.
The highest priority is to ensure that Pakistan can accelerate progress towards
meeting its Millennium Development Goal targets, particularly in poverty and
hunger, universal primary education, maternal health and environmental
sustainability. Achieving the 2015 targets and reducing poverty and inequality will
require broad-based and inclusive economic growth as well as targeted pro -poor
investments and programmes. It also calls for further strengthening of national and
provincial capacities and efforts to accelerate progress. The government response
has encompassed special programmes such as the Benazir Income Support
Programme, which provides cash grants, skills development and social safety net
support to 6 million poor families.
8.
The national average maternal mortality ratio is 276 per 100,000 live births. At
subnational level, the differences between and within provinces are significant,
indicating issues of access and use of services. 3
9.
Schooling disparities are also worrisome. In 2009, the average number of years
of schooling was 5.7, but the disparity between the poorest income quintile and the
richest ranged from 2.4 years to 8.9 years. Girls living in urban areas in the highest
income quintile received an average of 9.4 years of schooling, compared to 1 year
for rural girls in the lowest quintile. The challenge remains for federal and
provincial/area authorities and other stakeholders and partn ers to focus on poor
people in providing basic social services and social protection. An increase in
equity-focused expenditure on basic social services is crucial to ensure inclusive
development.
10. Good progress has been made in increasing net primary e nrolment rates across
the board, reducing gender disparities. However, 7.3 million children of primary
school age are not enrolled, 57 per cent of them girls. 4 The Government committed
to increase enrolment in Article 25A of the 18th Amendment to the Const itution,
which guarantees the right to education: “The State shall provide free and
compulsory education to all children of the age of 5 to 16 years in such manner as
may be determined by law.” This creates an enormous opportunity for a multi pronged approach to mobilizing both rights-holders and duty-bearers to ensure
fulfilment of this legal obligation while building provincial capacities and
addressing socio-cultural norms that keep children out of school.
__________________
3
4

4

Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2006-2007.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Education for all Global Monitoring Report 2011 (statistics as
of 2009).

11. While the population growth rate is decelerating, the total fertility rate has
levelled off at around four births per woman, with significant differentials among
income groups. According to the Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2006 2007, the total fertility rate of the lowest wealth quintile was 5.8 births, while that of
the richest quintile was 3. Women in the youngest reproductive age group of 15 -19
had a fertility rate of 51 births per 1,000 women, illustrating that early marriage and
childbearing persist. However, the unmet need for family planning was 20 per cent
among women in the 15-19 age group, indicating that, with better access to services,
fertility rates in this age group would decline.
12. Currently, 28 per cent of the population is between the age of 15 and 29 years.
Translating this “youth bulge” into a “demographic dividend” is a principal
challenge. Overall, the country’s labour force is increasing at 3.2 per cent per
annum. By 2030, the working-age population is expected to be around 67 per cent of
the total, compared to the current 55 per cent, with corresponding demand for
employment. However, 32 per cent of the youth are uneducated, and most of them
lack vocational or life skills. According to a survey by the Centre for Poverty
Reduction and Social Policy Development, unemployment is the second-biggest
problem faced by young people, after education. The Government’s Framework for
Economic Growth sees opportunities to develop marketable skills among young
people to increase their access to decent and productive employment. Wit h
approximately half of the population below 21 years old, the country must improve
the health and education of all children and adolescents, particularly those living in
persistent poverty.
13. Thirty-seven per cent of the Pakistan population lives in urban areas, and
growing urbanization is increasing pressure on the provision of quality services.
Equitable access to high-quality basic social services — including health,
reproductive health, nutrition, water and sanitation, hygiene promotion and
education — is constrained by the multiple dimensions of disparities. For example,
lack of investment in the health sector has caused gaps in access to primary health
care services, especially in preventive health care. The Expanded Programme of
Immunization coverage is insufficient; it varies significantly between
provinces/areas and districts. The Lady Health Worker Programme continues to be
the backbone of the community-based health care system, but its capacity is limited
due to insufficient resources. Addressing these issues requires strategic interventions
and careful policy adjustments in order to improve economic conditions and expand
social services. This includes health and education opportunities for children and
adolescents, particularly those living in persistent poverty.
14. The under-5 mortality rate in Pakistan is one of the highest in Asia. The rate
drops from 102 per 1,000 live births for children whose mothers have no education
to 59 per 1,000 for mothers with higher education. Among the lowest weal th
quintile, the probability of a child dying before its fifth birthday is 121 per 1,000
live births compared with 60 per 1,000 for the wealthiest quintile. The most
common causes of infant deaths are diarrhoea, respiratory infections, malnutrition
and birth asphyxia. This clearly indicates the close links among health systems,
maternal health and cross-sectoral issues such as nutrition, water, sanitation and
hygiene promotion, and education.
15. The maternal mortality ratio, 276 deaths per 100,000 live births nationwide,
ranges from 319 in rural areas to 175 in urban areas. Inequitable access to quality

5

maternal and newborn health services is a key barrier. Only 18 per cent of deliveries
take place in a facility, and this proportion is even lower in rural areas. Only 39 per
cent of births are assisted by skilled birth attendants — with a significant number of
these attendants working in the private sector. Among the poorest wealth quintile,
16 per cent of births had the benefit of skilled birth attendance compared with
77 per cent for the richest quintile. In addition, the latest Demographic and Health
Survey indicates that around 50 per cent of girls get married before age 20, and
14 per cent before the legal age of 16, most of them in rural areas. This co ntributes
to increased maternal mortality and vulnerability to maternal morbidities. According
to the Pakistan Population Policy 2010, the contraceptive prevalence rate has
stagnated at 30 per cent over the last decade. With unmet needs at 25 per cent, the
result is a high level of unplanned pregnancies, a major barrier to achieving the
target for Millennium Development Goal 5 on maternal mortality. It has been a
challenge for the health system to deliver efficient preventive and contraceptive
care, emergency obstetric and neonatal care, and other reproductive health services,
especially in rural areas.
16. Chronic and acute malnutrition remain at critical levels. Mothers and children
suffer from micronutrient deficiencies, particularly iron deficiency, ana emia, zinc
and vitamin A. Disruption of livelihoods, lack of access to food, deterioration in
hygiene and sanitation, and declining access to sufficient and clean water have
exacerbated the risk of malnutrition. Its direct and underlying causes include ear ly
and frequent childbearing, inadequate feeding practices for infants and young
children, inappropriate care-seeking behaviour and prevalence of diarrhoea, due to
inadequate access to clean water and safe sanitation. Root causes include
sociocultural barriers, lack of education, especially for women, insufficient health
care and limited awareness of proper nutrition.
17. The gravity of the nutrition situation countrywide led to development of the
Pakistan Integrated Nutrition Strategy. It establishes clearer accountability
structures, including cross-sectoral linkages, as well as participation by stakeholders
ranging from the Government and civil society organizations to international
organizations and donors.
18. The prevalence of HIV is concentrated among at-risk populations and is low in
the general population. However, a sustained public health response is required to
maintain this low prevalence rate.
19. The Government of Pakistan has increased its attention to protection of women
and children from abuse, exploitation and violence, including through important
legislation. Legislation has been passed to stop bonded labour and honour killings,
and bills have been introduced to address domestic violence and corporal
punishment. The weaknesses in protection systems require a systemic response,
including building on increased recognition by governmental authorities and civil
society of their roles and responsibilities.
20. Child protection issues such as low birth registration, child marriage, child
labour, children living and/or working on the street, children in institutions and
corporal punishment in schools and elsewhere are all related to poverty,
underemployment and low levels of education, especially among women. These
issues need stronger monitoring, reporting and action to bring Pakistan into
compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. (The

6

Government ratified this protocol in 2011.) Also in 20 11, Pakistan signed the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, a positive development for
both children and adults. It needs to be followed up with legislation and budgetary
allocations.
21. Women’s political participation has improved due to legal reforms and
allocation of reserved seats in parliament. The women parliamentarians’ caucus has
provided a strong forum for championing women’s causes. Pakistan has passed
landmark legislation to strengthen the protection of women against discrimi nation
and harmful traditional practices and to criminalize acid -throwing. While women’s
status and quality of life have improved in recent years, women’s economic
advancement remains a major challenge, as evidenced by their 21 per cent
participation in the labour force. So does their access to justice, legal aid and
reproductive health services. Women’s rights to own and inherit property have been
strengthened by recent legislation, though many women still face difficulties in
accessing rights and controlling resources. Capacity and policy gaps, inadequate
knowledge, attitudes and law enforcement remain to be addressed for effective
implementation of such legislation.
22. Pakistan has resiliently faced devastating natural disasters, including floods,
earthquakes, landslides and droughts, and tackled crisis-related challenges. The
2010 floods alone affected more than 18 million people, destroyed or damaged
1.9 million houses and ruined 6.2 million acres of crops. Damage to infrastructure,
habitat and loss of livelihoods, increased food and nutrition insecurity, and the
trauma of displacement have added to the challenges, both short term and long term.
The impact of these crises has been particularly severe for the most vulnerable
groups. The Government has shown its strong commitment to disaster management
by signing the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005 and creating a disaster
management framework. Additional efforts are needed to enhance disaster risk
management capacities and institutional linkages for an effective multi-hazard
response, including preparedness, mitigation, recovery and coordination.
23. Pakistan also faces considerable vulnerability to climate change and
environmental degradation. The burden falls disproportionately upon the poor and
most vulnerable due to loss of livelihoods. These environmental challenges are
compounded by natural resource management problems such as insufficient water
and solid waste management, loss of forest cover and land degradation. The
Government has made encouraging progress in approving environmental legislation
and building capacities to address environmental challenges. Additional efforts are
needed to promote climate change adaptation through institutional strengthening and
policy adjustments, as the climate change and environmental challenges are likely to
accelerate with population and economic growth and rising energy demands.
Renewable energy strategies also need to be promoted, particularly for the poor, and
public policies and measures need strengthening to engage civil society and build
stronger public-private partnerships.
24. Overall, the country’s ability to meet its socioeconomic goals rests on its
capacity to promote effectiveness, transparency, accountability and responsiveness
of public institutions at both federal and provincial/area levels, as well as to increase
targeted pro-poor investments and programmes and ensure a stronger equity focus.
Key priorities include strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing rule -oflaw capacities, structures and mechanisms to ensure greater people’s participation

7

and public trust. The 18th Amendment to the Constitution represents a key
milestone of governance reform. It further enhances decentralization through
delegation of a number of key functions. These include development planning, local
government/rural development, labour, agriculture, education, health, environment,
population, welfare, youth and women. Moreover, the seventh National Finance
Commission Award (which distributes resources from the federa l Government to the
provinces) has increased the quantity of resources transferred annually to
provinces/areas. Dedicated efforts are needed to address policy and institutional
capacity gaps and translate new provincial mandates and added responsibilities into
development results that will reduce inequities and improve delivery of quality
services for vulnerable groups.

II. Past cooperation and lessons learned
25. The One United Nations Programme 2009-2012 provided the United Nations
system in Pakistan with opportunities for cooperation through a strong platform to
enhance inter-agency cooperation under the leadership of the United Nations
country team and allowed for coherent responses to national development priorities.
Several reviews and evaluations of the five joint programmes constituting the One
United Nations Programme — Agriculture, rural development and poverty
reduction; Disaster risk management; Education; Environment; Health and
population — highlighted some good practices and results, including improved
provincial and regional engagement; increased capacity to deliver, as shown by an
expanded resource envelope; and effective experiences in joint programming. The
United Nations system delivered strongly together during the previous programme
cycle, including through humanitarian frameworks. The United Nations country
team can build on this strong coordination experience so that joint programming can
strengthen the links between humanitarian and development interventions during the
new programme cycle.
26. Another success of the previous programme was innovations in the health
sector; for example, public-private partnerships were pursued simultaneously with
strengthening of provincial health systems. In addition, interactions among multiple
education stakeholders created a common platform for advocacy. Other
achievements include the targeted response to natural resource needs identified at
local level, through provincial/area implementation committees under the joint
environment programme; effective joint multi-sector support to Afghan refugees and
their host communities; and joint capacity building of national disaster management
institutions and mainstreaming of disaster risk management. This collaboration
further linked humanitarian responses and development efforts.
27. A number of areas for improvement also were identified, providing lessons
learned upon which the three organizations can build within the CCPD framework,
in close collaboration with the United Nations country team. The managem ent
structure of the previous programme made it difficult for stakeholders to approve
project proposals and allocate resources in a timely manner. It also increased
transactional costs. High budget estimates and lower than expected donor interest in
joint programmes led to a significant resource gap and unmet expectations.
Recurrent natural disasters affected the achievement of planned development
results. Future initiatives will stress the need to ensure a timely start to early
recovery efforts in tandem with relief operations as well as integration of disaster

8

risk reduction measures. More effort is also required to ensure mainstreaming of
cross-cutting issues of human rights, gender equality and environmental
sustainability.
28. The 18th Amendment to the Constitution has had a significant impact on
programme management. A number of federal ministries were closed down, with all
functions devolved to provincial governments, including health, education, labour,
agriculture, population and women. Furthermore, improving overall impact and
sustainability has been identified as key to ensure, among other benefits, maximum
potential for working at scale, strengthened national ownership and improved
alignment to annual provincial development plans. Another area for improvement is
results-based management and a well-articulated monitoring and evaluation
framework based on reliable benchmarks.
29. The new programme will build on the important lessons learned and results
achieved during the previous programming cycle as well as the specific operational
context in which the programme shall be implemented. Additional support will be
given to capacity development of national and subnational government institutions,
alignment of management structures and improved coordinati on and communication
among partners.

III. Proposed programme
30. As noted in section I, the proposed common country programme is aligned
with national development priorities reflected in the Pakistan Framework for
Economic Growth and in the new One United Nations Programme. Within the new
framework, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF will work closely together and the three
organizations will collaborate with the rest of the United Nations country team and
other development partners to provide coherent and comple mentary policy and
institutional support to the Government of Pakistan. Contributions of the three
organizations, as indicated in the respective results and resources framework, form
part of the new country programme action plan at output level.
31. The overall goal of the common country programme is to assist Pakistan in
achieving national and provincial development goals and targets. These include the
Millennium Development Goals (and the development goals to be agreed beyond
2015) as well as the rights enshrined in international conventions to which Pakistan
has acceded. The programme will be implemented through a human rights -based
approach, aiming to advance inclusive and sustainable growth and ensure equity in
access to quality basic services and social protection.
32. The common programme will focus particularly on key areas for which the
three organizations have recognized mandates and proven comparative advantages.
The organizations shall adhere to their respective mandates and complement their
activities in line with the new One United Nations Programme to avoid duplication
and fragmentation. These are reflected in the commitments to outcome-level results
in the six priority areas of the new programme. Activities will be designed utilizing
sound impact analysis based on authentic baselines and indicators. Shared strategies
include capacity development of duty-bearers; mainstreaming actions that address
gender inequality; and effective implementation of the 18th Amendment. Strategic
shifts in the common country programme include more attention to the rapidly
growing urban population; tapping the potential of the large numbers of young

9

people; disaster risk reduction and other measures to strengthen the development
and humanitarian links, and promoting climate change adaptation and mitigation.
33. The common country programme will also support relevant international
commitments such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; Convention on the Rights of the Child an d its
Optional Protocols; Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development; World Summit on Sustainable Development; Hyogo Framework for
Action; World Fit for Children outcome document; and other mandates originating
from United Nations resolutions.
34. The United Nations will use its convening power to bring together
stakeholders and coordinate actions. Capacity development will be supported to
promote a multidimensional approach to poverty reduction. This will include
revision of legislative frameworks or adoption of new legislation to better address
the needs of vulnerable and marginalized groups. Policy-level support will be
complemented by community-level interventions in targeted geographic areas, with
specific focus on districts with low human development. Programme delivery will
be based on strong partnerships with relevant institutions at federal and
provincial/area levels and civil society organizations.
35. The United Nations will draw upon its global and regional knowledge
networks to share international best practices. It will also take advantage of
opportunities to improve public-private partnerships and South-South cooperation.
Lastly, it will advocate with policymakers to address inequality in policy processes
and to ensure that the voices of the most vulnerable are heard.
36. Through the proposed common country programme, the three organizations
will contribute to achievement of selected outcomes identifie d under the six
interdependent strategic priority areas of the new One United Nations Programme,
complementing work planned by other United Nations agencies:
(a) Vulnerable and marginalized populations have equitable access to and
use of quality services.
(i) The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement of One
United Nations Programme outcomes 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 — on equitable access to
and use of quality services for vulnerable and marginalized populations. This
will emphasize approaches that support federal and provincial/area
governments in addressing barriers to delivery of quality services, particularly
for women, youth, children and vulnerable groups. The programme will take
into account gaps in the Millennium Development Goals targets a s well as
emerging challenges, including devolution of power, integration of services
and private-sector service delivery.
(ii) Evidence-based policy, legislative, budgetary and accountability
mechanisms will be strengthened to support equitable access t o basic services
for inclusive human development, including in humanitarian settings. The
proposed programme also will support strong advocacy for behaviour change
and adoption of positive social norms. It will raise public awareness about the
needs of women, youth, children and vulnerable populations. Communities
will be empowered to change social norms, such as open defecation or child

10

labour. Individual and institutional capacities for equitable and results -based
service delivery will be strengthened at all levels, with reforms aimed at
ensuring efficiency and accountability. High-level, evidence-based advocacy
will address issues of early marriage, family planning and gender-based
violence, among others.
(b) Inclusive economic growth through the development of sustainable
livelihoods.
(i) The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement to three of
the four outcomes in Strategic Priority Area One of the One United Nations
Programme, namely, outcomes 2.1, 2.2 and 2.4 — supporting inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, with particular focus on poor people, youth and
women. Support will be given particularly to implementation of the
Framework for Economic Growth through support to provincial/area
governments in formulating their development strategies and plans. These will
promote inclusive and sustainable growth and work to accelerate poverty
reduction and achieve the Millennium Development Goals through policy
reforms, institutional capacity-building and targeted multi-sectoral approaches.
(ii) The programme will emphasize policy dialogue and evidence -based
policy and regulatory reforms that promote entrepreneurship and the business
opportunities among poor people and women. It will focus on small and
medium-size enterprises and foster skills development through public-private
partnerships. Initiatives to help poor people will be undertaken, providing
them with incentives to enhance the production and use of low-cost,
sustainable energy. Particularly, “green” development will be promoted at
household, community and national levels.
(iii) In addition, the programme will address the key causes and consequences
of population growth by generating evidence on emerging issues of population
dynamics. These include the growing numbers of young people, the resultant
potential demographic dividend and rapid urbanization, and their links with the
needs of young people (including adolescents), sexual and reproductive health
(including family planning), gender equality and poverty reduction. The
programme will emphasize greater use of data for more informed decisionmaking and policy formulation.
(c)

Increased national resilience to disasters, crises and external shocks.

(i) The proposed programme will help achieve outcomes 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 —
on resilience to disasters, crises and external shocks, through support for
institutional development. This will ensure effective disaster and crisis
management and improve planning and coordination capacities, including
child-sensitive and gender-sensitive approaches. Capacity development will be
supported at federal, provincial, district and community levels. Systems for
multi-hazard mapping and planning will be established, as will early warning
and community-based disaster risk management.
(ii) Particular attention will be paid to ensuring that vulnerable populations
benefit from crisis prevention and mitigation measures, sustainable
environmental management practices and climate change mitigation and
adaptation programmes. In addition, the programme will aim to strengthen
continuum from humanitarian response, including early recovery, to

11

development assistance. This will provide vulnerable communities most
affected by disasters and crises with improved socio-economic opportunities,
livelihoods and social protection.
(d)

Strengthened governance and social cohesion.

(i) The proposed programme will support the achievement of outcomes 4.1,
4.2, 4.3 and 4.4, on strengthened governance and social cohesion. This will be
achieved through support aimed at strengthening the capacity of democratic
institutions and promoting stronger accountability. It will address areas such as
improvement of electoral procedures and civic and voter education, with an
emphasis on women; evidence-based policymaking and parliamentary
oversight; and oversight of aid policy and coordination. The overall aid policy
aims to support efforts to increase aid effectiveness and coordination, ensuring
that it aligns with national and provincial development goals, the Millennium
Development Goals and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.
(ii) Emphasis will be given to the rule of law in selected areas in order to
strengthen public trust, social cohesion and stability. It will also aim to
improve access to justice through both formal and informal mechanisms, with
a focus on the rights of women and vulnerable populations. The proposed
programme will support the engagement of civil society, the media and
academia as integral elements of the democratic process. In particular, it will
work to strengthen decentralized governance under the 18th Amendment.
Approaches will include capacity development and evidence -based legislative
reform, as well as research and advocacy for administrative and fiscal
decentralization. In addition, the proposed programme will support
improvements to accountability and access to quality social protection, social
cohesion and legal services for vulnerable people. Capacities of provincial and
federal institutions to implement child protection systems and provide child sensitive social protection, including birth registration, will be strengthened to
ensure benefits to the most disadvantaged children. Cost -effective systems and
innovative technologies will be employed.
(e)

Gender equality and social justice.

(i) The common programme will contribute to the achievement of outcomes
5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 — on gender equality and social justice. It will focus on
enhancing women’s participation in political processes, legislation and public
sector decision-making. This will be based on electoral reforms and capacity
development initiatives such as networking among women parliamentarians in
the region.
(ii) Economic participation will be strengthened through support to
regulatory reforms and targeted initiatives, emphasizing women’s acc ess to
property, entrepreneurship and income-generation opportunities in selected
regions. In addition, gender-responsive budgeting will be strongly advocated.
So will establishment of mechanisms to strengthen monitoring of the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and gender-related issues in the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. The Ministry of Human Rights and the Human Rights
Commission will be supported to integrate protection of child rig hts and
justice for children into a strengthened protective environment.

12

(iii) The programme also will help to promote and protect the political,
economic, social, cultural and civil rights of children and vulnerable groups.
This will be achieved through targeted policy support, institutional
strengthening and capacity development assistance to human rights
institutions, improving their ability to support and promote integration of
human rights at all levels.
(f)

Food and nutrition security for the most vulnerable groups.

(i) The programme will support the achievement of outcomes 6.1 and 6.2 —
on improved food and nutrition security for the most vulnerable groups. It will
focus on support to development and implementation of nutrition -specific
interventions in every province/area. These will be complemented by
integrated, cross-sectoral strategies and plans to address malnutrition,
particularly among the most disadvantaged children.
(ii) An integrated response in water, sanitation and hygiene and educa tion
will be promoted, as well as strengthened facilities to provide more
comprehensive mother and child support. Integration of nutrition subjects into
formal and non-formal education curricula likewise will be promoted. So will
policies, legislation and capacity development and behaviour change
communication for better nutrition of people living in the most vulnerable
areas.

IV. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
37. The common country programme will be implemented within the management
and accountability structure of the new One United Nations Programme;
accordingly, the results and resources frameworks of the three organizations are
integral parts of the one country programme action plan, to be signed by the United
Nations and the Government of Pakistan. Implementation of the programme will be
anchored in the principles of aid effectiveness, such as national ownership and the
use of national systems and mechanisms. In exceptional cases, where relevant, the
direct implementation modality and the non-governmental organization (NGO)
execution mode will be employed, in concurrence with the Government’s Economic
Affairs Division. Management of the programme will be supported by a coherent
governance structure, with clear lines of accountabilit y and decision-making a
resource mobilization strategy, and a robust monitoring and evaluation plan that will
be duly agreed to by the United Nations Resident Coordinator and submitted to the
Government’s Economic Affairs Division for endorsement. Overall programme
management and coordination will be the joint responsibility of the Government and
the three organizations.
38. Building on lessons learned from the previous country programme, the
management approach for the new programme is flexible, cost -effective, sensitive to
potential risks and based on evidence. It will support joint programming to enable
innovation and integrated approaches without compromising accountability and
transparency. The management structure will take into account the structural and
functional changes of the Government under the 18th Amendment and
accompanying provincial/area specificities.

13

39. As part of overall management and oversight arrangements, a high -level
committee will be formed, co-chaired by the Secretary of the Government’s
Economic Affairs Division and the United Nations Resident Coordinator. It will
consist of federal and provincial/area governments, United Nations agencies and
donors. It will provide policy guidance on the One United Nations Programme and
its links with national priorities and processes. It will also decide on significant
programmatic changes and funding allocations not included in the agreed
framework. A provincial steering committee will be established for each of the eight
provinces/areas. Members will come from provincial, regional and federal
governments, including line departments, as well as from the United Nations. These
steering committees will report to the high-level committee.
40. The management structure for the common country programme will be
finalized as mutually agreed to through consultation among the three organizations.
The management structure, to be co-chaired by the Government’s Economic Affairs
Division and the United Nations Resident Coordinator, will include the
Representatives of the three organizations and involve relevant federal and
provincial/area government representatives. The three organizations will hold
annual reviews with the Government, represented by the Economic Affairs Division,
the United Nations Resident Coordinator and other stakeholders to take stock of
progress. These reviews will be complemented by quarterly financial and narrative
reporting through designated government reporting systems. Civil society
organizations and other development partners will be c onsulted to ensure
inclusiveness, transparency and aid effectiveness.
41. A midterm review of the One United Nations Programme will take place to
ensure continued alignment with national priorities. Final outcome evaluations will
be conducted for each of the six priority areas. These reviews and evaluations will
encompass an assessment of the contribution of the common country programme to
the results achieved in the strategic priority areas and outcomes. They will also
assess how the achievements of the common country programme contribute to
results in the country programme action plan and the results and resources
frameworks. The three organizations will ensure prior consultations with the
national Government and provincial/area governments before dissemi nating and
launching all studies and results reflecting the economic, social or environmental
situation in the country. Information will be uploaded as PDFs onto the website of
the Government’s development assistance database.

14

Annex
UNICEF results and resources framework for Pakistan, 2013-2017
One Programme and national strategic priority area 1: Vulnerable and marginalized populations have equitable access and use of
quality services
SPA 1 indicative resources: † core $57.4 million; non-core $206.2 million
Related UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) focus areas: all focus areas
One Programme outcome
and indicators
Outcome 1.1 (with
UNFPA)
Policy environment,
legislation, budgetary
allocation and
accountability mechanisms
strengthened in support of
equitable access to basic
social services for human
development.
Indicators: Percentage of
national and provincial
budget allocated to basic
social services; Number of
evidence-based policy
documents that specifically
address the needs of the
most vulnerable
populations.

Programme approaches, outputs* and indicators

Programme approaches: Strengthen capacity of partners on
the use of evidence-based policy analysis and equity-focused
and child-friendly budgeting to address barriers and increase
access to quality basic social services for the most vulnerable
children and women.
Output 1.1.1: Relevant federal and provincial/area authorities
and civil society organizations (CSOs) have improved capa city
to develop, adopt and implement equity-focused, childsensitive policies, laws, rules of business and sector plans,
strategies and budgets.
Indicator 1.1.1.1: Number of equity-focused, child-sensitive
policy reforms, legislative bills, rules of business and sector
plans with budgetary allocations developed.
Baseline: Health: 1; child protection: 6; education: 2; water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH): 2. Target: Health: 6; child
protection: 25; education: 5 new/2 updated; WASH: 7.
Output 1.1.2: Child ombudsperson, provincial/area social
welfare departments and relevant accountability mechanisms
are strengthening children’s welfare and protection systems.

Partners and
partnership frameworks

Indicative
resources

Federal: Planning
Commission; Cabinet
Division: Expanded
Programme on
Immunization Cell; Prime
Minister’s Office: Polio;
Ministry of Inter
Provincial Coordination.

Core:
$12,181,220
Non-core:
$35,037,730

Provincial/area:
Relevant departments,
local governments,
provincial assemblies.
Others: United Nations
agencies, World Bank,
Asian Development
Bank, private sector,
research institutions,
child rights organizations,
media, CSOs.

_____________
†

Overall SPA indicative resources have been rounded in the section headings. A detailed breakdown can be f ound in the “Indicative resources” column.

* Outputs are indicative in accordance with the draft United Nations Development Assistance Framework action plan of 20 April 2012.
15

16

Indicator 1.1.2.1: Number of fully functioning provincial/area
child ombudsperson systems.
Baseline: 7 under development. Target: 7 fully functional.
Output 1.1.3: Equity-focused child- and gender-sensitive
research and evaluations are conducted and used to inform
policies, planning, monitoring and budgets.
Indicator 1.1.3.1: Number of equity-focused
research/evaluation recommendations incorporated into
programmes/strategies.
Baseline: 6. Target: 55.
Outcome 1.2 (with
UNFPA)
Increased public awareness
and behaviour change to
ensure vulnerable
populations practice safe
behaviour, as well as access
and use quality services,
including housing.
Indicators: Percentage of
vulnerable populations
accessing and using basic
social-sector services.

Programme approaches: Empower community-based
organizations and relevant government partners to transform
discriminatory social norms and stimulate demand for quality
basic social services. Support the development and use of
behaviour change communication packages; provide technical
support for analysis, dissemination and use of the findings.
Output 1.2.1: Institutional capacity of partners is strengthened
to support sustained, equitable social change communication
and public discourse that promotes child rights and protective
behaviours and increases rights-holders’ demand for and use
of social services.
Indicator 1.2.1.1: Number of partners regularly
implementing, developing and improving an integrated
communication for development strategy.
Baseline: Health: 1; child protection: 0; education: 1; WASH: 1;
polio 0. Target: Health: 6; child protection: 8; education: 7;
WASH: 5; polio 1.
Output 1.2.2: The most vulnerable children, families and
community leaders participate in communication for
development activities for sustained social change to improve
children’s lives.
Indicator 1.2.2.1: Survival/completion rate at grade 5.

Partnership
frameworks: Global
Partnership for
Education, relevant
United Nations
frameworks, Global Fund
for Sanitation/Water
Supply and Sanitation
Collaboration Council,
Global Partnership for
Education, H4+ for
maternal health, GAVI
Alliance, Global Fund for
AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.

Core:
$14,852,150
Non-core:
$78,263,070

Baseline: 55. Target: 85.
Indicator 1.2.2.2: Percentage of people reached by Mother
and Child Health Week.
Baseline: 57. Target: 80.
Indicator 1.2.2.3: Number of villages/informal urban
settlements certified free of open defecation.
Baseline: 1,000. Target: 15,000.
Indicator 1.2.2.4: Number of confirmed polio cases.
Baseline: 198. Target: 0.
Indicator 1.2.2.5: Percentage of HIV-positive pregnant
women and exposed infants receiving antiretroviral treatment
for prevention of parent-to-child transmission.
Baseline: 1.8%. Target: 50%.
Outcome 1.3 (with
UNFPA)
Capacity for equitable
social service delivery
improved at all levels,
including use of innovative
technology.
Indicators: Number of
basic social service delivery
offices that use innovative
technologies to improve
service delivery.

Programme approaches: Strengthen capacity of partners to
deliver child-friendly, equity-focused, integrated approaches to
overcome barriers to accessing quality basic social services
and protection/social assistance for the most vulnerable,
including those with disabilities.
Output 1.3.1: Relevant provincial/area departments have
developed and are implementing human resource management
strategies and long-term human resource development plans.
Indicator 1.3.1.1: Number of relevant provincial/area
departments with a human resources management plan that
calls for deploying and retaining providers in underserved
areas.
Baseline: Health: 1; education: 0; WASH: 0.
Target: Health: 7; education: 7; WASH: 7.
Output 1.3.2: Provincial/area authorities and CSOs have
improved capacity to deliver basic services, including testing
and evaluating innovative models, and to scale up proven best
practices for equitable service delivery.

Core:
$30,380,390
Non-core:
$92,942,940

17

18

Indicator 1.3.2.1: Social service models developed,
implemented, evaluated and scaled up.
Baseline: Health: 9 districts for 24/7 obstetric services;
WASH: Pakistan Approach to Total Sanitation reached
5 million people; Education: 4,900 child-friendly schools.
Target: Health: 14 high-risk districts with 24/7 obstetric
services; WASH: Pakistan Approach to Total Sanitation
reached 20 million people; Education: 10,000 child -friendly
schools.
Indicator 1.3.2.2: Percentage of children under age 5 fully
immunized.
Baseline: 44. Target: 85.
Indicator 1.3.2.3: Percentage of people using an improved
water source.
Baseline: 91. Target: 95.
Indicator 1.3.2.4: Number of provincial and district-level
education sector plans incorporating the child-friendly schools
framework.
Baseline: Provincial 5, district 0. Target: Provincial 7,
district 65.
Indicator 1.3.2.5: Percentage of women in lowest wealth
quintile in selected districts whose births are assisted by
skilled birth attendant.
Baseline: 16. Target: 70.
One Programme and national strategic priority area 3: Increased national resilience to disasters, crises and external shocks
SPA 3 indicative resources: core $12.3 million; non-core $40.8 million
Related UNICEF medium-term strategic plan focus areas: all focus areas

One Programme outcome
and indicators
Outcome 3.1 (with UNDP)
National, provincial and
district capacities to
prevent, assess, reduce and
manage risks are developed.
Indicators: Number of
National Disaster
Management Authority,
Provincial Disaster
Management Authorities
and District Disaster
Management Authorities
that accord with
international humanitarian
principles and priorities.
Outcome 3.3 (with UNDP)
Vulnerable populations in
crisis benefit from
improved prevention, risk
reduction and response
(mitigation), and are
assisted to reach
development goals,
including Millennium
Development Goal targets.
Indicators: Proportion of
provinces/districts with
disaster coordination
mechanisms and plans in
place.

Programme approaches, outputs and indicators
Programme approaches: Strengthen capacity of disaster
management authorities and provincial/area governments in
child- and gender-sensitive disaster risk reduction and disaster
management.
Output 3.1.1: Relevant provincial/area authorities and CSOs
have integrated child-specific disaster risk reduction
components into their sector plans and budgets.
Indicator 3.1.1.1: Number of provincial/area departments that
have integrated child-specific disaster risk reduction
components into sector plans.
Baseline: Education: 2; health: 0; WASH: 0. Target:
Education: 7; health: 6; WASH: 7.

Programme approaches: Strengthen systems for early
warning and disaster management and coordination. Build
capacity for collection and analysis of timely information for
reducing risks to the most vulnerable children and women in
crisis situations.
Output 3.3.1: Multi-hazard assessments are conducted with
the most vulnerable populations, and risk management action
plans are implemented for the protection of children and
women.
Indicator 3.3.1.1: Number of hazard-prone districts with risk
management plans in place that include specific measures and
actions for children and women.
Baseline: 0. Target: 35.

Partners and
partnership frameworks

Indicative
resources

Federal: Ministry of
Climate Change, National
Disaster Management
Authority, Planning
Commission.

Core:
$7,360,490
Non-core:
$24,472,170

Provincial/area:
Provincial Disaster
Management Authorities,
relevant departments,
Humanitarian Clusters.
Others: United Nations
agencies, World Bank,
Asian Development
Bank, CSOs, academic
institutions, media,
telecommunications
companies.

Core:
$4,906,990
Non-core:
$16,314,780

19

20

One Programme and national strategic priority area 4: Strengthen governance and social cohesion
SPA 4 indicative resources: core $2.4 million; non-core: $8.6 million
Related UNICEF MTSP focus area(s): child protection; policy advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights
One Programme outcome
and indicators
Outcome 4.3 (with UNDP)
Improved accountability and
access to quality social
protection and other
services for vulnerable
groups.
Indicators: Proportion of
population covered by
social protection policies
and programmes;
proportional increase in
registration of new births
and documentation of
migrants and people
affected by crises.

Programme approaches, outputs and indicators
Programme approaches: Strengthen partnership with
relevant authorities and establish coordinated approaches;
conduct bottleneck analysis; use innovative technology and
cost-effective systems to increase birth registration. Address
social cohesion by promoting participatory approaches
involving children, teachers, parent-teacher associations and
community networks.
Output 4.3.1: Increased percentage of children holding birth
certificates.
Indicator 4.3.1.1: Percentage of children registered at birth
and receiving birth certificates.
Baseline: 27. Target: 75.

Partners and
partnership frameworks

Indicative
resources

Federal: National
Database and
Registration Authority.

Core:
$2,368,290

Provincial/area:
National Database and
Registration Authority,
local governments,
relevant departments.
Others: Children’s
associations, CSOs,
media, human rights and
research institutions,
NGOs.

Output 4.3.2: Selected districts have education sector plans
that strengthen social cohesion activities for school-age
children, parents and other stakeholders in rural and urban
areas.
Indicator 4.3.2.1: Percentage of selected districts with
education sector plans that include strengthened social
cohesion activities for school-age children, parents and other
stakeholders.
Baseline: 100% with some activities. Target: 100% with
strengthened activities.

One Programme and national strategic priority area 5: Ensure gender equality and social justice
SPA 5 indicative resources: core $3.7 million; non-core: $13.5 million
Related UNICEF MTSP focus area(s): All focus areas

Non-core:
$8,595,410

One Programme outcome
and indicators
Outcome 5.1 (with UNDP)
Government and civil
society are active and
accountable in eliminating
discrimination against
women and girls.
Indicators: Proportion of
Universal Periodic Review
and Committee on the
Rights of the Child
concluding observations
and remarks implemented;
number of key institutions
with a gender policy in
place.

Programme approaches, outputs and indicators
Programme approaches: Support relevant stakeholders to use
evidence, research and analysis to strengthen advocacy,
policies, legislation, budgets and plans in favour of gender
equality and social justice. Enable improved monitoring and
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and acting on concluding observations and
remarks of the respective convention committees as well as
other relevant recommendations related to children arising
from international conventions and instruments.
Output 5.1.1: Relevant governmental authorities and others
have strengthened capacity to monitor, report on and
implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and act upon the concluding observations and
remarks of the convention committees, as well as other
relevant child-related recommendations arising from
international conventions and instruments.
Indicator 5.1.1.1: Government and CSOs are reporting on and
implementing the Convention on the Rights of the Child
provisions and the child-related provisions of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women.
Baseline: Infrequent and incomplete reporting and
implementation. Target: Yearly reporting and improved
implementation.
Output 5.1.2: Government authorities and others use
improved tools, disaggregated data, research results and best
practices to implement concluding remarks and
recommendations of the convention committees, including
strategies and plans to address biases against vulnerable
children.
Indicator 5.1.2.1: Number of provincial/area action plans
supported by disaggregated information that are developed and

Partners and
partnership frameworks

Indicative
resources

Federal: Planning
Commission, Ministry of
Human Rights, Human
Rights Commission,
Parliamentarians,
Commission for Child
Welfare and
Development.

Core:
$2,950,590

Provincial: Relevant
departments, local
authorities, provincial/
area public sector
institutions, Provincial
Assemblies.
Others: United Nations
agencies, academic/
research institutions,
children’s associations,
CSOs, media, human
rights organizations,
NGOs, South Asian
Initiative to End Violence
Against Children.

Non-core:
$10,605,620

21

22

implemented to address concluding remarks and
recommendations of the convention committees and biases
against vulnerable children.
Baseline: 0. Target: 7.
Outcome 5.2 indicators
(with UNDP)
Political, economic, social
and legal rights of all, and
especially vulnerable
groups, are respected,
protected and fulfilled,
including through
institutional strengthening
and capacity development
of duty-bearers.
Indicators: Number of laws
revised to comply with
international standards.
Outcome 5.3
Human rights institutions
strategically positioned and
advocating to integrate
human rights at all levels.
Indicators: Number of
cases submitted to Human
Rights Commission and
resolved.

Programme approaches: Enhance capacity of provincial/area
and district authorities to implement legal and policy reforms
and strengthen child protection systems, to provide enabling
protective environment and justice for children, especially for
vulnerable groups.

Core:
$60,220
Non-core:
$216,440

Output 5.2.1: Systems and relevant institutions have the
capacity to ensure fulfilment of children’s rights to protection
and justice, especially for those from vulnerable groups.
Indicator 5.2.1.1: Functional child protection systems are in
place to ensure protection and justice for the most vulnerable
children.
Baseline: 6 systems under development. Target: 7 systems
meeting international standards.
Programme approaches: Strengthen capacities of human
rights institutions at federal, provincial/area and district levels
to monitor and report on the realization of children’s rights.
Output 5.3.1: The realization of children’s rights is
mainstreamed into the core functions of human rights and
other institutions, particularly the Ministry of Human Rights
and provincial/area human rights departments.
Indicator 5.3.1.1: Children’s rights are mainstreamed as one
of the core functions of the Ministry of Human Rights, Human
Rights Commission and provincial/area human rights
departments.
Baseline: 0. Target: 8.

Core:
$728,570
Non-core:
$2,662,350

One Programme and national strategic priority area 6: Food and nutrition security for the most vulnerable groups
SPA 6 indicative resources: core $6.7 million; non-core $24.5 million
Related UNICEF MTSP focus area(s): Young child survival and development
One Programme outcome
and indicators
Outcome 6.2
Nutrition security increased,
especially for vulnerable
groups.
Indicators: Percentage
increase in household
consumption of fortified
foods including
complementary foods;
percentage of children under
6 months exclusively
breastfed; percentage
reduction in malnutrition in
children and women.

Programme approaches, outputs and indicators
Programme approaches: Support the federal and
provincial/area governments to develop integrated nutrition
strategies, operation plans, legislation and guidelines.
Facilitate inter-sectoral contributions through the health,
agriculture, food, water and sanitation, and education sectors.
Strengthen capacity to design, manage and implement
nutrition-specific interventions, including maternal nutrition,
infant and young child feeding promotion and micronutrient
interventions. Develop nutrition capacity through integration
of nutrition into academic training institutions and pre -service
and in-service trainings.
Output 6.2.1: Integrated nutrition strategies are developed
and implemented to address malnutrition among the most
vulnerable.
Indicator 6.2.1.1: Number of federal and provincial/area
governments that have developed and implemented integrated
nutrition strategies.
Baseline: 1. Target: 8.
Output 6.2.2: Caregivers in high-risk districts practice an
essential set of behaviours for prevention of malnutrition in
children.
Indicator 6.2.2.1: Percentage of children under 6 months
exclusively breastfed.
Baseline: 37. Target: 65.
Indicator 6.2.2.2: Percentage of households consuming
iodized salt.

Partners and
partnership frameworks

Indicative
resources

Federal: Planning
Commission, Cabinet
Division, Ministry of
Inter Provincial
Coordination, Ministry of
Food Security and
Research.

Core:
$6,701,520

Provincial/area:
Relevant departments,
local bodies.
Others: United Nations
agencies, academic
institutions, CSOs,
media, human rights
organizations, NGOs,
Micronutrient Initiative,
Global Alliance Initiative
for Nutrition.
Partnership
Frameworks: Scaling Up
Nutrition partners.

Non-core:
$24,479,480

23

24

Baseline: 69. Target: 90.
Indicator 6.2.2.3: Percentage of children aged 6-23 months
fed a minimum acceptable diet.
Baseline: 8.3. Target: 30.
Cross-sectoral costs

Core:
$8,250,000
Non-core:
$26,420,000

UNICEF indicative resources for 2013-2017
Core:

$90,740,430

Non-core: $320,010,000
Total:

$410,750,430

