Palestinian children and women in Jordan, Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the State of Palestine
Area programme document
2015-2016

The draft country programme document for Palestinian
children and women in Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the State of Palestine (E/ICEF/2014/P/L.7) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2014 annual
session (3-6 June 2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data†
(2012 unless otherwise stated)
Palestinian
refugees
registered with
UNRWA in
Jordan d

State of Palestine

Palestinians
in Syrian Arab Republic
(2006)

1.0/1.0

0.2

d

0.2

d

0.3/0.3

23

30

c

17

c

25

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

4 (2010)
..

10
10/10, 11/9, 10/12

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live
births, adjusted)

64 (2010)

46

c

..

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

82 (2011)

73

c

72

c

100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

94 (2011)

97

c

98

c

93

94

c

93

c

100

99

c

89

c

99

Child population (millions, under 18 years,
male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

97

a

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

a

Primary school enrolment/attendance
(%, net male/female)
Survival rate to last primary grade
(%, male/female)

Palestinians
in Lebanon
(2011)

5
5/5, .., ..

4
..
13

90/90 (2011)

98/98

95/97

98/98

100/99 (2011)

98/99

94/97

88/85

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, male/female)

..

..

..

..

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)

..

..

..

..

7/4 (2010)

2/1

9/6

..

99 (2010)
99/99, 99/99, 99/100

99
99/99, 99/99, 99/99

99
98/99, .., ..

..
..

..

..

..

Child labour (%, 5-14-year-olds, male/female)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

..

b

e

† More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed methodological notes on estimates can be found
at www.childinfo.org.
a
The immunization figures reported in the above table are inter-agency estimates prepared by WHO/UNICEF. Estimates
disaggregated by sex are available from survey data, as follows: DPT3, male (99%) and female (98%); measles, male (97%)
and female (97%), from the Palestinian Family Health Survey, 2006.
b
Estimated to be lower-middle income ($1,036 to $4,085).
c
This estimate is not from the standard source used across country programme document (CPD) basic data tables for this
indicator, due to a lack of data availability for this population. Thus, this estimate may not be directly comparable with others.
d
Data from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are used here in
the absence of representative data for this population. Esti mates in this column have not been verified and are not comparable
with other estimates presented in this or other CPD basic data tables, where estimates are representative of the respective
populations.
e
A birth registration estimate for Palestinian refugees registered with UNRWA in Jordan is not available. According to the
latest Demographic and Health Survey in Jordan (2012), the national level of birth registration is 99%, and the level in camp s
is 100%.

2/15

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
In the State of Palestine, 2.7 million people live in the West Bank and 1.7 million
in Gaza. Nearly three fourths (74 per cent) of the total Palestinian population resides
in urban areas, 17 per cent in rural areas and 9 per cent in refugee camps. 1 About 68
per cent of the population in Gaza receives assistance from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), compared to
30 per cent in the West Bank. 2 The number of long-term Palestinian refugees in the
three host countries is 1.9 million in Jordan (33 per cent of the country’s population),
460,000 in Lebanon and 500,000 in the Syrian Arab Republic. 3 The Palestinian
population is overwhelmingly young, with 45 per cent below 18 years of age and mor e
than 20 per cent adolescents aged 10-18 years (with some country-level variations).
2.
The Palestinian Authority has made progress towards achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. However, the daily lives of children and their
families are framed within the context of the Israeli occupation, and continue to be
marked by poverty and food insecurity disparities, restrictions on the movement of
goods and people, and lack of control over and access to natural resources. Reforms
in recent years have considerably strengthened national capacities to provide a range
of social services to Palestinians, but challenges remain regarding quality and access.
The ability of the Palestinian Authority to provide coverage for the people of Gaza,
Area C of the West Bank, and East Jerusalem has been severely curtailed. 4 Children’s
lives are affected by the blockade in Gaza, and the separation barrier in the West Bank.
Women and children are most vulnerable to the effects of these challenges.
3.
According to UNRWA in the Syrian Arab Republic, 5 70 per cent of Palestinians
have been displaced, with many living in schools and public facilities, and 440,000
requiring urgent humanitarian assistance as a result of the ongoing crisis. Vaccination
coverage for children under 5 years of age, especially infants under age 2, has dropped
in many districts. Fewer than half of the 23 UNRWA health centres are still
functioning. Almost two thirds of the UNRWA schools (76 out of 118) are closed due
to damage or insecurity or because they are being used for shelter. 6
4.
In Lebanon, the arrival of additional refugees is exacerbating the resources of
communities, and stretching the services supported by the Government of Lebanon
and UNRWA. Palestinian refugees are mostly hosted by the poorest communities in
Lebanon. The average age of those registered with UNRWA is 25, and 51 per cent are
women, 26 per cent are school-age children and 15 per cent are infants.

__________________
1

2
3

4

5

6

Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), press release on the eve of International
Population Day 11/07/2012.
UNRWA figures, 2012: www.unrwa.org.
UNDP, Human Development Report, 2013, ‘The rise of the South’. Please note that in the Syrian
Arab Republic the situation of Palestinian populations is changing rapidly.
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, ‘State
Building in the Occupied Palestinian Territory: Opportunities for recovery and development
challenges’, 2009.
www.unrwa.org/newsroom/official-statements/crossroads-crisis-yarmouk-syria-and-palestinerefugee-predicament; downloaded 11 March 2014.
Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan, January-December 2014. http://www.unocha.org/
cap/appeals/syria-humanitarian-assistance-response-plan-sharp-january-december-2014.

3/15

5.
In the State of Palestine, levels of poverty remain high (39 per cent in Gaza and
18 per cent in the West Bank lives below the national poverty line ). 7 The proportion
of food-insecure households increased nationally from 25 per cent in 2011 to 34 per
cent in 2012 due to the economic slowdown. 8
6.
Children are exposed to various forms of violence. Between 2008 and 2013,
there were 575 Palestinian children killed and 5,405 injured across the SoP due to
conflict 9. In the State of Palestine, 27 per cent of children aged 2-14 years were
subjected to severe physical punishment at home. 10 Some 83 per cent of Palestinian
children in Lebanon are subjected to violent discipline at home. Around 52 per cent
of children in Jordan are exposed to both physical and verbal violence at school. 11
7.
In the State of Palestine, 40 per cent of women aged 20 -24 were married before
age 18. 12 The rate of early marriage among Palestinian girls in Lebanon is
19 per cent 13 and in the Syrian Arab Republic is 22 per cent. 14 Among Palestinian
refugees in Jordan, 20 per cent of females in camps marry by age 16, and 41 per cent
marry between the ages of 17 and 20. Compliance with international juvenile justice
standards is progressing at a varying pace, with legal reforms under way in Jordan and
the State of Palestine. Children with disabilities have little access to health, education
and other development and welfare services.
8.
Progress towards achieving Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 has been
good in the State of Palestine. The under-five mortality rate in 2012 was recorded as
23 per 1,000 live births and the infant mortality rate as 20 per 1,000 live births in
2011, equating to a reduction of almost half since 1990, when under-five mortality
was 43 per 1,000 and infant mortality was 36 per 1,000. 15 The neonatal mortality
rate 16 accounted for 61 per cent of overall infant mortality. Accidents are the leading
cause of death for children aged 1-4 years, accounting for 24 per cent of deaths.
9.
In the State of Palestine, the stunting rate is 12 per cent for boys and 10 per cent
for girls. 17 Rates of exclusive breastfeeding for children aged 0 -6 months remain low,
at 17 per cent among Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and 29 per cent in the State of
Palestine and in the Syrian Arab Republic, 18 and 23 per cent in Jordan. 19 According
to one survey, 41 per cent of the Palestinian refugee children aged 6 -12 years from

__________________

PCBS, ‘Palestine in figures 2012’, March 2013.
PCBS, World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
UNRWA, ‘Socio-economic and food security survey, West Bank and Gaza, Palestine’, 2012.
9 Compiled from Reports of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict to the UN
Security Council, since 2008 and up to and including 2014, S/2014/339, para 78
10 PCBS, ‘Palestinian family survey’, 2010. The survey defines violent discipline as
“psychological aggression” or “physical punishment”.
11 UNICEF Jordan, ‘Violence against children study’, 2007.
12 PCBS, ‘Palestinian family survey’, 2010.
13 MICS 4, Palestinians in Lebanon, 2011.
14 Palestinians Living in Syria multiple indicator cluster survey, 2006.
15 United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. Data including 1990
baseline from: ‘Levels and Trends in Child Mortality (2011 data)’, 2012 Report, IGME.
16 PCBS, ‘Palestinian family survey’, 2010.
17 Ibid.
18 Data for Syrian Arab Republic is dated 2006, and progress on indicators has been negatively
affected by the conflict.
19 Jordan Demographic and Health Survey, 2012.
7
8

4/15

the Syrian Arab Republic now in Lebanon reported having consumed only one meal
the previous day. 20
10. Access to safe, sufficient and affordable water continues to pose a major
challenge for children and their families in the State of Palestine. In Gaza, only
14 per cent of households have access to safe drinking water and only a quarter of
wastewater is treated. Due to the deterioration and contamination of the coastal
aquifer, desalination of sea water has become the only viable option for safe drinking
water supply for Gaza. The ability of the Palestinian Authority to transfer water to
areas facing shortages is severely curtailed. In addition, with the ongoing blockade,
the deteriorating water infrastructure cannot be easily rehabilitated.
11. The high value placed on education over several decades has resulted in high
net enrolment and attendance rates and gender parity. Basic education is free and
compulsory for Palestinian refugees in Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, and they
have access to both public and UNRWA schools. However, the current crisis has led
to stagnating enrolment rates and high dropout rates in the S yrian Arab Republic and
among the recent Palestinian refugee populations in Jordan and Lebanon. In the
Syrian Arab Republic, 47,000 Palestinian students of 66,000 were enrolled in
2013/2014. 21
12. Young people drop out of school in the upper primary and lower secondary
grades. In the State of Palestine 16 per cent of students who enter grade 1 drop out
before reaching grade 10. The reasons for dropping out are related to the school
environment, family socioeconomic situations, as well as the ongoing restrictions on
access. More boys than girls drop out at secondary and tertiary levels, but girls’ higher
educational achievement does not always translate into better employment options.
13. In the State of Palestine, the national early childhood development (ECD)
strategy was endorsed by the Ministry of Education and Higher Education in 2013.
Preschool classes are being institutionalized in the formal education system. In
Lebanon, according to the 2011 multiple indicator cluster survey (MICS), on ly
57 per cent of Palestinian refugee children aged 36 -59 months were attending
preschool.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2011-2014
(a)

Key results achieved
14. New or enhanced policies and legislation. The Palestinian Authority has
integrated the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child into its relevant
legal frameworks, including the amended Child Law, which was enacted in 2013,
providing additional protection for children. 22 With UNICEF support the juvenile
justice strategic framework, the policy of non-violence and discipline in schools, the

__________________
20
21

22

UNRWA/World Food Programme survey in Lebanon, October 2013.
UNRWA – Syria Regional Crisis Response January to December 2014,
http://www.unrwa.org/sites/default/files/2014_syria_emergency_appeal.pdf; information
downloaded 30 March 2014.
United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General, ‘Assistance to the Palestinian people’
(A/68/76-E/2013/65).

5/15

social protection sector strategy and the national ECD strategy were finalized and
adopted in 2013. Working with the Palestinian Authority and civil so ciety partners,
UNICEF provided support for capacity development, technical advice, resource
mobilization and policy advocacy.
15. Evidence and knowledge. One of the main achievements of the area
programme was the production and dissemination of studies a nd surveys, including
on equity and disparities, to facilitate better targeting of services and policies. The
2010 Palestinian Family Survey was finalized and the MICS5 was initiated with the
Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics PCBS. The national surv ey on micronutrients
and anaemia, the first survey of such magnitude to be conducted by the Ministry of
Health, was completed in 2014. The study will provide a baseline for micronutrient
deficiencies and will inform Ministry of Health strategic plans as we ll as
communication strategies for behaviour change. In Jordan, the Department of
Statistics, in collaboration with UNICEF and other partners, completed the 2012
Population and Family Health Survey, which provides comprehensive child and
maternal health data, including on Palestinians. In Lebanon, a MICS was conducted
in camps and gatherings in 2011 and launched in December 2012.
16. UNICEF and partners have generated data on the situation of Palestinian
children in detention. The study on ‘Palestinian Children in Israeli Military Detention’
was released in early 2013 following a process of verification and engagement with
multiple stakeholders. The study reviewed the treatment of Palestinian children from
the West Bank in Israeli military detention. It offered practical measures to uphold
child rights and support improvement of justice and protection of children according
to international standards. The subsequent engagement and dialogue on the issue
resulted in the decision of the Government of Israel to pilot test the use of summonses
in lieu of night arrests, starting from February 2014. A study on children in detention
in the Palestinian Authority justice system has also recently been completed. Actions
in this area will be dealt with as part of ongoing UNICEF work supporting justice for
children. In Jordan, a youth national survey, which also covered Palestinian youth,
helped inform the national youth strategy action plan.
17. Systems strengthening. Technical support was offered to assist governments
and partners to build capacities of service providers to deliver high -quality services
aligned with international standards. In the State of Palestine, UNICEF supported the
Ministry of Health in developing and adopting the first national marketing code for
breast-milk substitutes, which will be the main regulatory tool to control the local and
private market for these substitutes. In addition, UNICEF supported the Ministry of
Social Affairs to strengthen the 13 multidisciplinary child protection networks and to
develop a national protocol for the referral of children in need of protection. In Jordan,
UNICEF supported the introduction of U-CAN (UNICEF Change Agents Network),
an innovative tool to promote the participation and civic engagement of youth. UCAN and other youth organizations were key to the success of the November 2013
immunization campaign, which reached over 1 million children. Furthermore, a child
protection case management service system was operationalized in the Marka camp
and replicated in other camps.
18. Humanitarian action. In the aftermath of the hostilities that escalated in Gaza
in late 2012, UNICEF provided medical supplies and non-food items, supported the
repairs of water supply networks, rehabilitated damaged schools, and carried ou t a
mine risk education campaign. Teams were deployed to provide psychosocial support

6/15

to children impacted by the hostilities in Gaza, and identified through the UNICEF led rapid psychosocial assessment. UNICEF continued to lead the water, sanitation
and hygiene (WASH) and education clusters and the Child Protection Working Group.
In 2013-2014 efforts are being made to build the capacity of local authorities in these
areas.
19. In Lebanon, UNRWA and UNICEF provided primary and secondary health
services to more than 330,000 Palestinian refugees (280,000 from Lebanon and
50,000 from the Syrian Arab Republic) through 27 UNRWA health centres. As part of
the winter response in Lebanon, UNICEF provided approximately 250,400 Lebanese,
Palestinian and Syrian children with winter clothing, clothing vouchers, supplies and
heating in 2013. In the Syrian Arab Republic, UNICEF and partners reached over
19,500 adolescents through UNRWA adolescent-friendly spaces in Palestinian camps
and UNRWA school clubs.
(b)

Lessons learned
20. The quality of programmes improved as a result of efforts invested in expanding
partnerships and in improving coordination in the identification of gaps,
establishment of priorities, and defining indicators to assess progress.
21. The evaluation of the adolescent development and participation (ADAP)
programme 23 highlighted the benefits in helping adolescents become more
empowered and to act as agents of positive social change. As demonstrated in the
State of Palestine, it is important to tailor programmatic approaches and strategies to
the different needs of adolescent boys and girls. Furthermore, work with adolescents
has to be complemented by efforts to promote an environment that is receptive to and
encouraging of participation by young people.

The area programme, 2015-2016
(a)

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

State of Palestine

420

2 400

2 820

Lebanon

500

400

900

Syrian Arab Republic

280

120

400

Jordan

200

140

340

State of Palestine

500

3 700

4 200

Lebanon

500

400

900

Syrian Arab Republic

100

50

150

Jordan

350

210

560

Programme component

Education

Child protection

__________________
23

UNICEF Middle East and North Africa Regional Office, ‘The Right to Participation —
Adolescents: Agents of positive change’, 2011.

7/15

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

State of Palestine

380

1 509

1 889

Lebanon

350

340

690

Syrian Arab Republic

150

80

230

Jordan

350

210

560

State of Palestine

390

980

1 370

Lebanon

350

260

610

Syrian Arab Republic

330

180

510

Jordan

100

70

170

320

5 200

5 520

830

180

1 010

1 860

1 554

3 414

Lebanon

200

300

500

Syrian Arab Republic

240

70

310

Jordan

100

70

170

8 800

18 423

27 223

State of Palestine

4 700

15 523

20 223

Lebanon

1 900

1 700

3 600

Syrian Arab Republic

1 100

500

1 600

Jordan

1 100

700

1800

Programme component

Adolescent development and participation

Health and nutrition

Water, sanitation and hygiene
State of Palestine
Social policy and evidence
State of Palestine
Cross-sectoral
State of Palestine

Total

(b)

Preparation process
22. The APD has been developed following consultations with the Palestinian
Authority and key counterparts based on their development priorities and strategies.
The APD was informed by recommendations from programme evaluations and studies
that were important to guide strategy development and refinement of priorities. In
Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, consultations with UNRWA and
national partners were held and agreement on priorities was reached, taking into
account the analysis and priorities outlined in the Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan and the Regional Response Plan. In the State of Palestine, a range of
evaluations and studies and a comprehensive situation analysis were critical inputs to
the establishment of priorities.
23. UNRWA is a key partner for UNICEF in Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic. A memorandum of understanding has been signed with UNRWA to support
recently displaced Palestinian refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic as well as
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. The memorandum will further strengthen

8/15

coordination of interventions and the monitoring of results. In Jordan, the
collaboration with UNRWA is focused on a range of programmatic initiatives in
Palestinian refugee camps at both strategic and service delivery levels as well as
improved monitoring systems.
(c)

Programme components, results and strategies
24. The overall goal of the area programme is to improve access to basic services,
the protective environment and social inclusion for Palestinian boys, girls and women.
This will be achieved through (a) capacity development of national and civil society
partners, with a focus on legislation and social service systems strengthening; (b)
research that contributes to knowledge and evidence informing social policy and
social protection for children; (c) interventions that directly address barriers to equity
for
vulnerable
and
marginalized
communities;
and
(d) support to both sustain and encourage resilience to address vulnerabilities.
25. Social inclusion will be advanced in the key sectors of education, child
protection and adolescent development and participation. Specific interventions in the
health and nutrition sector will also be carried out. In the State of Palestine, WASH
and social policy will also be addressed as priority areas.
26. This two-year programme will build on ongoing successes and lessons lear ned.
It will also respond to the specific vulnerabilities of Palestinian refugee children
affected by the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon and Jordan, with an
emphasis on access to basic services. The programme design has taken into
consideration both development and humanitarian needs, with a special focus on the
rights of the most vulnerable and excluded children.
Education
Outcome 1: Vulnerable children benefit from improved access to learning
opportunities from preschool to completion of basic education.
27. The education component will focus on boys and girls from early childhood
(4 to 6 years of age) through adolescence (up to 18 years). Throughout the area, the
programme will focus on early childhood learning and access to basic e ducation and
learning opportunities. In the State of Palestine and Jordan, it will provide technical
support to include children with disabilities in education and promote a violence -free
environment.
28. UNICEF will support these initiatives by introducing innovative methods and
tools for remedial education and access to basic formal education. It will provide
high-level technical expertise to improve inclusive education, in particular targeting
the most vulnerable children and those with disabilities. Gender equality will be
promoted by taking into account gender-specific issues in the design of interventions.
29. In the State of Palestine, this component will focus on strengthening capacity.
Support to teachers and school administrators will ensure that preschools and primary
schools welcome children with disabilities. It will also provide guidance for the
implementation of the policy of non-violence and discipline in schools. Within the
context of the recently adopted ECD strategy partners will be monitored and trained
in order to increase the services available for preschool -aged children
(4-6 years). In addition, capacities will be strengthened to plan and monitor quality

9/15

and inclusive education and to implement the school management information system
and improve coordination.
30. In the Syrian Arab Republic, UNICEF and partners will jointly roll out a self learning programme, which aims to increase access to basic education for the most
vulnerable children. Technical support will be provided to increa se access to
community-based ECD services for Palestinian children in the country.
31. In Lebanon, UNICEF will support access to quality ECD services through
provision of supplies and capacity-building of the staff of non-governmental partners
who provide the services. Remedial classes for children will be offered at UNRWA
schools and at centres supported by other partners. UNICEF will also support the
skills building of staff who supervise remedial learning for Palestinian refugee boys
and girls in grades 1 to 8.
32. In Jordan, with technical assistance from UNICEF, UNRWA and the Ministry of
Education will implement an action plan for providing quality and inclusive education
in UNRWA community-based rehabilitation centres and schools. The plan will use a
disability-related situation analysis in all official and unofficial camps as a basis for
designing and implementing appropriate and effective responses by different
stakeholders. To address high dropout rates, particularly of girls, UNICEF will also
support violence-free schools in camps and conduct behavioural change campaigns
on prevention of early marriage and corporal punishment.
Child protection
Outcome 2: Girls and boys increasingly benefit from improved child protection
systems for prevention of and response to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect.
33. This component covers the entire geographic area of the programme. UNICEF
will work with national and subnational partners to ensure that more children are
protected from violence through improved capacity of partners and service providers
to detect, prevent and respond to acts of violence against children. It will also engage
with communities to raise their understanding of how to prevent violence. Prevention
of violence against children will require strong cross-sectoral collaboration, involving
authorities and experts on education, health and adolescence. For example,
collaboration between child protection and health officials and their ministries will
be needed, where a policy and subsystem are to be developed to detect, refer and
report cases of violence and abuse against children.
34. A focus in the State of Palestine programme will be on developing national
capacities to provide child protection services. This includes strengthening
psychosocial services, building on good practices already being implemented, to
better protect children living under occupation. UNICEF will support implementation
of the amended Child Law and increase capacities to legislate, plan and operationalize
coordinated approaches to child protection. UNICEF will also support
implementation of the Juvenile Protection Law to protect children in conflict with the
law. Violations of child rights will require ongoing support to multiple partners to
document grave violations against children and to protect them from armed conflict.
35. In Lebanon, UNICEF will strengthen response and preventive interventions in
child protection and gender-based violence services. Child protection systems in the
camps will be mapped and case management and referral systems established.
Capacity-building support will be extended to UNRWA and Palestinian

10/15

non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to manage and refer cases involving child
protection abuses and gender-based violence. UNICEF will involve a range of
community members in providing psychosocial support services.
36. In Jordan, the programme will support students, teachers, principals, parents and
members of the wider community, including in Palestinian refugee camps, to
transform their schools to become more inclusive, safer and free of violence. This will
involve a programme of capacity development. Particular attention will be given to
changing social norms on violence against children in schools through a
communication for behaviour change campaign. It will build on lessons from the
Ma’An campaign against school violence. The programme will continue to strengthen
the capacity of UNRWA to assess and respond to vulnerable Palestinians ’ needs for
protection by replicating the successful model for multidisciplinary case management
teams, which was previously implemented in the Marka camp. Special attention will
be extended for protection and rehabilitation of abused children, children deprived of
parental care and children in conflict with the law.
37. In the Syrian Arab Republic, a two-pronged approach will be adopted involving
both prevention and response to the most pressing protection needs by raising
awareness and building capacity. UNICEF will provide psychosocial support to
Palestinian children by supporting the establishment of fixed and mobile child friendly spaces and training young community volunteers in psychosocial support.
For prevention, a child protection awareness campaign, which will also reach out to
Palestinian children and communities, will address gender-based violence, child
recruitment and prevention of family separation, among other issues. In partnership
with UNRWA, the mine risk education module will be introduced in UNRWA schools
and other schools attended by Palestinian children. In addition to UNRWA, UNICEF
will partner with the Palestinian Red Crescent and other Palestinian NGOs.
Adolescent development and participation
Outcome 3: Adolescent girls and boys are enabled to contribute to community and
national development and make a productive transition to adulthood.
38. This programme component, which covers the entire geographic area of the area
programme, aims to further develop policies and partnerships that recognize the
importance of constructive engagement with adolescents (primarily aged 10 to
19 years). An important aspect of the programme is to help them acquire skills and
competencies for positive participation in their societies and to provide opportunities
that support the transition to adulthood.
39. UNICEF will contribute to promoting youth and adolescent empowerment and
participation through innovative means of communication and capacity-building. The
latter will include support to youth-led initiatives and those aimed at building
entrepreneurial and life skills. In Jordan and State of Palestine, a strong
communication for development effort will be undertaken to promote greater
acceptance of and engagement by policymakers with young people.
40. In the State of Palestine, adolescent programming will build o n the
achievements from the previous cycle. It will shift the focus to provide adolescents
with opportunities to be empowered to make decisions that will influence their
transition to adulthood. The programme will, in a gender-sensitive manner, use
innovative approaches including social media and the arts to promote healthy

11/15

lifestyles and learning opportunities. Partner capacities will be developed to
implement the action plan for national standards for adolescent and youth centres.
41. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the capacities of partners, including local NGOs,
will be enhanced to provide lifeskills programming to adolescents and promote their
participation in developing and delivering community initiatives.
42. In Lebanon, UNICEF will make special efforts to increase engagement of the
most marginalized and vulnerable adolescents. Together with UNRWA, UNICEF will
scale up and institutionalize successful initiatives in the camps, and provide
opportunities for volunteerism and internships.
43. In Jordan, the programme will offer expanded civic engagement and leadership
opportunities to Palestinian youth and adolescents in the camps, especially to the most
marginalized and vulnerable. The programme will roll out the lifeskills manual in
adolescent-friendly spaces, UNRWA schools and community-based organizations.
Ongoing support for networking among adolescents will be expanded through the ‘U CAN’ network, in which adolescent change agents will participate in planning and
evaluating programme activities through social media and other means.
Health and nutrition
Outcome 4: Women and children, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized,
increasingly use improved maternal, child health and nutrition services, and apply
improved health practices.
44. Across the area programme, this component will aim to increase provision of
and access to maternal and child health services and promotion of appropriate infant
and young child feeding practices that incorporate breastfeeding, as well as healthy
nutrition, especially in early childhood.
45. UNICEF will support capacity development interventions targeting health
professionals from ministries of health and/or NGOs, UNRWA and other local
partners. It will also aid communication for development initiatives across a range of
communities and refugee camps and among displaced populations in Jordan,
Lebanon, the State of Palestine and the Syrian Arab Republic.
46. In the State of Palestine, a focus on communication for development will be
applied to strengthen home-based care as part of the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative
and neonatal health care services established during the previous cycle. Behavioural
change and communication interventions targeting vulnerable communities and
marginalized areas will be used to address non-communicable diseases and injury and
accident prevention. Technical assistance will be refocused to support systems and
capacities to ensure that supply chains are functioning. The objective is to complete
the final phase of handing over the procurement processes for the national Expanded
Programme on Immunization.
47. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the focus will be on improving access to health
services to internally displaced Palestinian families living in Syrian host communities
and to refugees living in camps, by building the capacity of local partners including
NGOs and promoting service delivery. Preventing malnutrition among young children
and raising families’ awareness of the importance of breastfeeding and proper
complementary feeding for young infants will be a key emphasis.

12/15

48. In Lebanon, UNICEF will strengthen the capacity of UNRWA, as the primary
provider of health services to Palestinian refugees, to address the bottlenecks in
improving the quality and coverage of immunization and nutrition services to children
and women living in the camps. This will be done by expanding provision of vaccines
and immunization supplies, vitamin A and oral rehydration salts. To address the
critical issue of anaemia and malnutrition among newborns, UNICEF will support the
UNRWA supplementary feeding programme for pregnant women and breastfeeding
mothers. It will also organize information sessions for pregnant and lactating
Palestinian women about breastfeeding, child feeding and care practices, and
anaemia.
49. In Jordan, emphasis will be given to targeted capacity-building of health
providers based in refugee camps, emphasizing the integrated management of
childhood illness for children under 5 years of age. Capacity development will include
establishment of guidelines for infant and young child feeding and maternal and child
health. Pregnant women and mothers will improve their knowledge of the benefits of
breastfeeding and learn about proper child feeding practices and better parenting
approaches.
WASH
Outcome 5: Children and their families increasingly benefit from access to safe and
affordable water and sanitation and adopt improved hygiene practices.
50. Implemented only in the State of Palestine, this programme component aims to
support national capacities in planning, budgeting and managing the equitable
delivery of safe water and sanitation systems. This will be done through three areas.
First, continued support to achieve the optimal effectiveness of the Palestinian Water
Authority’s water information system for water and sanitation management.
Humanitarian coordination functions will continue to be transitioned to national
authorities for both sudden- and slow-onset crises involving access to safe water and
sanitation. UNICEF will continue to advocate for environmentally sustainable
approaches for increasing access to water.
51. Second, the successful WASH in Schools initiative will be extended into a
second phase. Evidence on successful practices and lessons learned on WASH in
schools will be obtained from a planned evaluation of the project and from a study on
knowledge, attitudes and practices study on WASH in Schools.
52. Third, the large-scale sea water desalination project in Gaza, supported by
UNICEF and partners, will complete phase one and potentially expand into phase two.
Behavioural change communication and hygiene awareness will continue to be
integrated into all infrastructure activities.
Social policy and evidence
Outcome 6: Children increasingly benefit from an improved policy environment
based on research and data.
53. This programme component will be implemented only in the State of Palestine,
with a focus on building the capacities of authorities to legislate, plan and budget for
inclusive social policy and social protection for children. UNICEF will continue its
role as technical advisor to the Social Protection Sector Working Group as well as the
lead agency for the UNDAF social protection theme group. Through cooperation with

13/15

the Ministry of Social Affairs, key donors and implementing agencies, this component
will engage in and influence policy dialogue and advocacy related to UNICEF
programming interventions.
54. The strong partnership with the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics will
continue to be pivotal. The focus will be on increasing the capacity of the Palestinian
Authority to manage research and analysis related to priority issues affecting children.
Cross-sectoral
55. Despite the small geographic area covered by the area programme, the
complexities of the political and operational environment, in terms of the ongoing
occupation and regional political instability, require strong cross-sectoral support.
Heightened focus on security is crucial in a context in which major and minor
conflicts threaten the safety of staff and assets. Cross-sectoral costs also cover supply
management, routine administration, finance and human resources and support for
information and communication technologies.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
56. The APD is aligned with the first UNDAF for the State of Palestine (2014 -2016).
The Palestinian National Development Plan 2014-2016 is a key reference, as is the
2013 situation analysis prepared by the Ministry of Planning and Administrative
Development and UNICEF. The outcomes included in the relevant UNDAFs
encompass several priorities of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017: health,
education, nutrition, WASH and protection of children and women. The area
programme has been informed by key priorities outlined in r elevant sector strategies
and programme working groups.
57. Across the area programme and especially in Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic, the situation requires a dual focus on development and humanitarian
approaches to meet immediate needs. The 2014 Syria Humanitarian Response Plan
and the Regional Response Plan were important references in this context.
Relationship to international priorities
58. Programme priorities are informed by the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Millennium
Development Goals and Millennium Declaration. Where relevant they are also
informed by Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009) and 1998 (2011)
on children affected by conflict.

Major partnerships
59. UNICEF maintains strong partnerships with the Palestinian Authority and
national authorities, and with UNRWA across the area program me. Both the United
Nations country team and the humanitarian country team in the State of Palestine are
forums for further promoting partnerships in pursuit of important results. Other key
stakeholders include Red Crescent societies and a range of NGOs an d civil society
and faith-based organizations.

14/15

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
60. Each country office will monitor the performance of its component of the area
programme by developing monitoring and evaluation plans focused on measur ing
progress towards the achievement of its outcomes. Joint studies and evaluations will
be conducted as appropriate. In Lebanon a number of innovative monitoring tools
have been developed for facilitating monitoring and reporting in the context of
humanitarian interventions, and these can be adapted to the development context for
use by other country offices and partners. These tools include online partner tracking
and monitoring and data collection using tablets and smartphones to enhance rapid
data entry and analysis for quick action.
61. Considering programmatic synergies across the area, there are opportunities for
closer collaboration among the four offices, ranging from joint efforts on
communication for development campaign materials to resource mobilization and
fundraising efforts. The APD also offers a common platform for reporting and
conducting joint communication and advocacy efforts.

15/15

