Paraguay
Country programme document
2007-2011

The draft country programme document for Paraguay
(E/ICEF/2006/P/L.50) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2006 annual session (5-9 June
2006).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2007 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 19 January 2007.

Basic data †
(2004 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

2.7
24

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2000/2001)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2002)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2002/2003)

5
180
89/89

Primary school children reaching grade 5 (%, 2001/2002)

70

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2002)

83

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, end 2003)

0.5

Child work (%, children 5-14 years old, 1992)

8 ††

GNI per capita (US$)

1 170

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

76

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

89

†
††

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.
Indicates data that differ from the standard definition or age -group.

The situation of children and women
1.
The 2005 Common Country Assessment (CCA) highlighted the weakness of
Paraguayan institutions and the existence of a significant social deficit resulting
from decades of insufficient social investment. The country’s first Millennium
Development Goals report, prepared in 2005, found insufficient progress towards all
but two of the seven goals examined: universal primary education and gender
equality.
2.
Of Paraguay’s population of 5.7 million people, 48 per cent is under 18 years
of age and some 43 per cent lives in rural areas. The country has the second most
unequal income distribution in Latin America. The indigenous population of 89,000
individuals includes 19 ethnic groups. Although representing only 2 per cent of the
population, indigenous peoples have the worst social development indicators of any
segment of Paraguayan society. Another excluded segment is the monolingual
Guarani speakers; nearly 60 per cent of households use Guarani as their first
language. A significant proportion of children and adolescents do not yet enjoy full
exercise of their rights, especially the Guarani-speaking poor and the indigenous,
who are subject to exclusion, discrimination and inadequate protection.
3.
Real per capita income has stagnated at 1980 levels, and poverty rate rose
from 32.1 per cent in 1997/1998 to 38.2 per cent in 2005, increasingly affecting the
urban population. Nearly half of the country’s children are poor. Although a Social
Promotion and Protection Network targeting poor families has been se t up, it is still
highly insufficient to tackle poverty. Consequently, the country is not on track to
reach the first Millennium Development Goal.
4.
A major constraint for public policy formulation and monitoring is the
inadequately developed national statistical system, with data not yet sufficiently
regular, timely or consistent. Estimates for the infant mortality rate, for instance,
range from 21 to 34 per 1,000 live births. The Millennium Development Goals

2

report concluded that the trend observed from 1995 onwards indicates that it is
unfeasible for Paraguay to reach Goal 4 on child mortality. Insufficient social
investment has translated into a health system that leaves many excluded. A basic
health insurance scheme for pregnant women and children und er 5 was designed but
its implementation is at an early stage. Among the main causes of infant mortality
are (a) problems during birth delivery and infections among newborns, in a country
where only 74 per cent of deliveries are attended by skilled personn el (58 per cent in
the rural areas); and (b) acute respiratory infections and diarrhoea. These continue to
present a challenge, as does achieving universal immunization coverage. Progress
also has been insufficient on Goal 5 of reducing the maternal mortal ity ratio by three
fourths.
5.
Malnutrition constitutes a threat to children’s right to survival and
development. Underweight prevalence is 7.3 times more common among children
living in poor households than among children living in rich households. Chroni c
malnutrition (stunting) affects 13.7 per cent of all children under 5, increasing to
41 per cent among the indigenous population. Exclusive breastfeeding for the first
six months of life is just 22 per cent. The National Programme for Food and
Nutritional Assistance, targeting children under 5 years of age and pregnant women,
was launched in 2005, but is still of limited scope.
6.
In 2004, only 58 per cent of the population had access to safe drinking water.
This proportion declined to 33 per cent in rural areas and 2.5 per cent among the
indigenous population. An estimated 44 per cent of the total population had access
to basic sanitation. Although public expenditure has prioritized health and water and
environmental sanitation – in 2005 public budget allocations to health were 43.7 per
cent greater than in 2003, and 100 per cent higher to water and sanitation – funding
is not sufficient to reach the most excluded groups, particularly indigenous and poor
rural communities.
7.
The adult HIV prevalence rate was 0.5 per cent in 2003. Actions for
HIV/AIDS prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care are still weak and of low
coverage and quality. As a result, insufficient progress has been made towards
reaching Millennium Development Goal 6. Feminization of the epidemic signals a
worrisome trend: in 2004, approximately three cases of male infection were reported
for every female infection reported, compared with a 28:1 ratio in the early 1990s.
Implementation of the National Programme to Prevent Vertical Transmissi on of
HIV/AIDS is under way. Launched in late 2005, the programme provides pregnant
women and adolescents with access to free, voluntary counselling and testing, and
to treatment, if required.
8.
The Education Reform initiated in 1992 has achieved important results
towards realizing children’s right to education. The pre -school net enrolment rate for
children aged 5 increased from 17 per cent in 1992 to 74 per cent in 2002, and the
net primary school enrolment rate for both boys and girls was 89 per cent in
2002/2003. These figures indicate that it is feasible to reach Millennium
Development Goal 2. However, in 2001/2002, only 70 per cent of all school
children completed grade 5 (only 20 per cent of indigenous children). Teaching
methods and curricula do not sufficiently address children’s bilingualism.
Educational materials are written predominantly in Spanish, the language used
almost exclusively in higher grades. Pregnancy is a cause for girls’ exclusion from
formal education. The secondary school net enrolment ratio is 51 per cent, which

3

shows that half of all children are left behind. In terms of the quality of education,
children are achieving 50 per cent of the established learning standards in key areas.
9.
In 2001, approximately 1 in every 5 children between 10 and 17 years of age
was economically active, and almost half of economically active children were
below age 15. Children who work every day have shown poorer academic results on
national tests. Boys work in greater proportion than girls, but th e latter dedicate
more working hours to “invisible” or domestic-type labour, beginning at a very
early age. The Programa Abrazo (“embrace programme”) for the Progressive
Eradication of Child Labour on the Streets was initiated in 2005; nevertheless, the
protection of children from exploitation and abuse is still inadequate.
10. Paraguay has already ratified the majority of international treaties on human
rights and has advanced in adjusting its legal framework to the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, this compliance is neither
accompanied by strong public institutions and programmes nor translated into
necessary changes of behaviours and social practices of duty-bearers. The National
Child Rights Protection System aims to promote enhanced protection of children
from violence, exploitation and abuse, but is not adequately implemented. It is
estimated that 22.3 per cent of all children are not registered. Sexual exploitation of
children, coupled with trafficking, is particularly prevalent in borders areas,
including the Tri-Border area between Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay. Women in
particular are victims of trafficking. The main underlying causes of all these
problems, as highlighted in the recommendations of the Committee on t he Rights of
the Child, include weak institutional capacity, financial constraints and inadequate
inter-institutional coordination. These issues will receive further emphasis in the
new country programme.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2002-2006
Key results achieved
11. Through the Joint Project with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNICEF contributed to
an increase of 39 per cent in the allocation of public funds for social investment
between 2002 and 2005. In a move towards greater transparency and accountability,
the Government has granted to the Joint Project direct, on-line access to its
Integrated Financial Management System, allowing close monitoring an d analysis of
the national budget. As a direct result of the project’s advocacy, children under
5 and pregnant women are now benefiting from a programme to combat
malnutrition, for which $6 million was allocated by Congress. This is the first time
public funds of this magnitude have supported a nutrition initiative.
12. Children are now better protected from violence, abuse and exploitation,
thanks to important improvements in the legal framework. UNICEF advocated
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
in partnership with numerous child rights non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
With the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNICEF advocated ratification
of the ILO conventions concerning minimum working age and the worst forms of
child labour. The National Secretariat for Child and Adolescent Affairs led the

4

process of criminalizing child pornography, with strong UNICEF technical
assistance.
13. Thanks to implementation of the National Programme to Prevent Vertical
Transmission of HIV/AIDS and an important South-South cooperation initiative on
HIV/AIDS with Brazil, each year 300 fewer children will be infected during
pregnancy and delivery. This amounts to almost all cases currently registered.
UNICEF provided technical assistance, supplied rapid test kits, and is importing,
with no cost to Paraguay, antiretroviral drugs donated by the Government of Brazil.
14. Through UNICEF direct support, and in partnership with local governments,
indigenous peoples’ organizations and local NGOs, hundreds of indigenous families
from 140 communities and 10 ethnic groups have improved conditions in health,
nutrition, water, sanitation and girls’ education. Grassroots organizations have
strengthened their capacity to protect children’s and women’s rights and to generate
demand for basic social services at municipal and state levels. Ten municipalities
have strengthened their institutional capacity to serve children through the
establishment of Municipal Councils on Child and Adolescent Rights. Local
interventions supported by UNICEF have been adopted as models for large -scale
Government-led initiatives: the water provision system to indigenous communities
in dry land areas has been adopted by municipal governments; and a local project to
eradicate child labour served as an important model for the Abrazo programme.
Lessons learned
15. Experience has shown that local-level interventions need to be linked with
policy frameworks at municipal, state and national levels. In 2002 -2006, this linkage
was made difficult by a two-pronged structure in which one programme
concentrated on national-level work and the other on local-level work. As a result,
the sustainability of local-level interventions was compromised. The new
programmatic structure will be organized around thematic interventions at all levels,
ensuring an integrated policy approach.
16. As highlighted by the 2004 mid-term review (MTR), the UNICEF-UNDPUNFPA Project on Social Investment has effectively leveraged resources for the
realization of rights through high-quality technical analyses and strong
communication and policy advocacy. Therefore, UNICEF and its partners should
continue to use this inter-agency strategy in public-policy advocacy work.
17. The effectiveness of the UNICEF role in securing participation from both
governmental and non-governmental organizations to better protect the rights of
children and adolescents has been demonstrated in several cases. For instance, an
inter-institutional Commission for the Monitoring of Penitentiaries, convened by
UNICEF, helped to improve the detainment conditions of adolescents in conflict
with the law. Similarly, UNICEF articulated efforts leading to the enactment of a
law that criminalizes child pornography. The new prog ramme of cooperation should
further position UNICEF as a major advocate for children’s rights.
18. The adoption by the Government of the Abrazo programme in 2005 to combat
child labour on the streets, based on a methodology developed by UNICEF,
demonstrates the importance of supporting and documenting rights-based
experiences that are in line with national priorities. The existence of a documented

5

successful intervention model allowed for a fast response to the rights violation and
helped to ensure the leverage of public funds.

The country programme, 2007-2011
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programmes

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival and development

1 938

3 517

5 455

Public policies and child protection

1 292

2 345

3 637

500

300

800

3 730

6 162

9 892

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
19. It took longer than planned for finalization of the CCA, which occurred in the
second half of 2005. For the CPD, UNICEF organized a la rge national consultation
in December 2005 with key counterparts and strategic allies, including Government
institutions, NGOs and sister United Nations agencies. The CPD was developed in
the first quarter of 2006 alongside the draft of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF), which was ready weeks before the CPD was
finalized. The CPD process proved to be invaluable for reinvigorating relations with
partners, strengthening strategic alliances and laying the foundation for including
children’s and women’s issues in both the CCA and the UNDAF.
20. The new country programme also reflects the results of the 2004 MTR and
continued consultations with counterpart Ministries, particularly regarding the
adjustment needed in the work carried out at local level. Due consideration was
given to the Observations made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the
country’s second report. Among the recommendations taken into account was the
need for efforts in several areas: advocacy to increase investment in children; the
establishment of child protection mechanisms; the improvement of national
statistical data on children; the promotion of non-discrimination; cultural and
linguistic adaptation of learning materials; the improvement of the civil reg istry
system for births; and the provision of assistance to adolescents in conflict with the
law.
Goals, key results and strategies
21. The overall goal of the new country programme is to support national efforts
to ensure that all children in Paraguay enjoy greater respect, fulfilment and
protection of their rights as a result of improved capabilities and increased
opportunities, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The
country programme constitutes the UNICEF contribution to meeting the Millennium
Development Goals and the Goals-related intermediate development targets set by
the Government.

6

22. Key expected results include the following: Key expected results include the
following: (a) exclusive breastfeeding for children under six months of age is
adopted by at least 35 per cent of all nursing mothers; (b) 94 per cent of primary
school-age children are enrolled in school, with an emphasis on reaching excluded
girls, children with disabilities and rural children; (c) at least 90 per cent of school
children successfully reach Grade 5; (d) at least 70 per cent of all children living
with HIV/AIDS benefit from access to comprehensive care and support services; (e)
50 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women have access to prevention of motherto-child transmission plus programmes; (f) at least 70 per cent of all children are
opportunely registered within their first year of life; and (g) resource alloc ation for
social investment has increased from 41 per cent to at least 48 per cent of the
National Budget, focusing on the most vulnerable and marginalized populations.
23. UNICEF will seek to influence public policy-making at all levels, promoting
thematic and financial prioritization of the realization of children’s and women’s
rights. The human rights-based approach to programming guides the entire country
programme, which focuses in particular on disadvantaged groups in poor rural and
urban areas, social and gender disparities, and indigenous populations. The
following specific strategies will be employed: (a) utilizing evidence -based policy
advocacy through effective communication, knowledge-generation, and the
provision of strong technical assistance; (b) creating and strengthening existing
partnerships to promote and monitor compliance of rights and to ensure
sustainability of processes; (c) convening partners and building consensus around
child rights; (d) fostering the ability of rights-holders to claim their rights and
developing the capacity of duty-bearers to fulfil, respect and protect these rights;
(e) ensuring that policies and services take into account disparities and different
cultural contexts, particularly regarding indigenous communities; (f) using social
modelling as a tool for scaling up successful interventions and influencing public
policy-making; and (g) incorporating emergency preparedness and response in all
areas of work, prioritizing at-risk and/or affected populations.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
24. Paraguay’s national development priorities are articulated in the National
Strategy for the Reduction of Poverty and Inequality, the Economic Growth with
Equity Plan and the National Environmental Policy Document. The priorities
strongly emphasize the reduction of poverty and the improvement of social
conditions for the excluded. In this regard, the country programme will advocate
and promote the increased allocation of public funds for social investment. It wi ll
also provide technical assistance to the Government in key social areas such as
education and health, aiming at an increase in the coverage and quality of public
social services. The country programme is consistent with the following components
of UNDAF key outcome areas: (a) strengthening national capacities to formulate
and implement policies and programmes to combat poverty and inequalities;
(b) promoting accountability of the public sector in relation to civil society;
(c) increasing the coverage and quality of public health care and education services;
(d) strengthening the national statistical system; and (e) improving the management
and delivery of basic environmental sanitation services.
Relationship to international priorities

7

25. The country programme will contribute to the priorities identified in the
medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) for 2006-2009, supporting national efforts in
the areas of early child development (ECD), quality basic education, HIV/AIDS,
child protection and public policies.
26. The country programme’s key results will contribute to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals for 2015 and the Government’s intermediate goals
for 2008, particularly through interventions aimed at poverty reduction, primary
education, gender equality, child mortality and maternal health. UNICEF has played
a pivotal role in defining these intermediate targets, which show the Government’s
commitment to work towards achieving the Millennium Agenda.
Programme components
27. Based on lessons learned from previous cooperation, the structure of the
country programme for 2007-2011 will further strengthen the internal capacity of
UNICEF to link local-level projects with its public-policy work at national, state
and municipal levels. The programme’s thematic structure, which aligns with the
MTSP, will help to ensure programme cohesiveness at all levels. Interventions
centre around two major programmes: (a) child survival and development; and
(b) public policies and child protection. They will contribute to the realization of
children’s rights, with due attention paid to the most underserved regions of the
country and to using a gender-based, culturally sensitive approach. The main
UNICEF role will be to provide technical assistance for public policy deve lopment,
leverage resources for children, and promote information dissemination to
strengthen children’s and families’ capacity to claim their rights.
28. The child survival and development programme has three components. The
first one, on health and nutrition, seeks to ensure that women and children enjoy
their right to healthy lives, particularly during pregnancy and early childhood,
respectively. UNICEF will support the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare
and other partners in their efforts to implement the National Plan for the
Comprehensive Care of Children and Adolescents and the National Plan for Food
Security and Nutrition. These plans include core areas such as integrated
management of childhood illnesses, immunization, breastfeeding and n utrition. Key
allies in health and nutrition include the Children’s Pastoral of the Catholic Church,
the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO), and UNFPA. In the area of water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH), UNICEF will work with other United Nations
agencies and international donors to support national institutions in order to improve
service coverage and quality, through culturally appropriate modalities for
indigenous and rural communities.
29. The second component, on education and equity, seeks to ensure that more
children, particularly those currently excluded from the educational system, enjoy
their right to a quality basic education responsive to the multicultural and bilingual
context of the country. To make further progress toward reaching Millen nium
Development Goals/Education for All targets, UNICEF will support national efforts
to expand child development strategies (with a family and community focus), and
will promote inclusive and culturally-appropriate public policies to increase school
retention and completion rates. Initiatives to overcome gender bias in education and
to increase student participation will be supported. UNICEF will work closely with
the Ministry of Education and Culture, at both central and decentralized levels,

8

development cooperation agencies, and international financial institutions,
particularly the Inter-American Development Bank. Important partners will include
civil society, teachers, and indigenous and student organizations .
30. In the third component, covering HIV/AIDS, UNICEF will seek to strengthen
the national response to the epidemic in order to ensure universal access to
prevention, treatment and care. Emphasis will be placed on supporting the national
capacity to design, implement and monitor public policies an d programmes on
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS; comprehensive care for
children and adolescents affected by HIV/AIDS; and access to information
(especially by groups at risk and women). Efforts will be made to empower leaders,
mobilize civil society (including people living with HIV/AIDS), strengthen
information systems and advocate the allocation of more public resources for this
area. UNICEF will promote the “three ones” strategy and will coordinate its
assistance with the National HIV/AIDS Programme and the National NGO Network
on HIV/AIDS within the context of the United Nations Joint Programme on
HIV/AIDS Thematic Working Group and in partnership with other organizations,
including the United States Agency for International Development, the Peace Corps
and Plan International.
31. The second major programme, Public Policies and Child Protection, is divided
into two components. The first one, on public policies, will support the formulation
and implementation of rights-based public policies to combat poverty and
inequalities that affect children and adolescents, within the framework of Paraguay’s
commitments to the Millennium Development Goals and intermediate national
development goals. Support will be provided to increasing the vol ume, efficiency
and accountability of public social investment via ongoing budget analysis,
monitoring and advocacy at the national and subnational levels. The production of
strategic information for policy advocacy and decision-making will be supported, as
will capacity development for national emergency preparedness and response.
Strategic allies and counterparts include the Ministry of Education and Culture, the
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Justice and Labour, the Ministry of Public
Health and Social Welfare, the National Secretariat for Child and Adolescent
Affairs, the Secretariat for Social Affairs, the Secretariat for Women’s Affairs, the
Technical Secretariat for Planning, the National Congress, PAHO, UNDP and
UNFPA.
32. The second component, on child protection, aims at creating a protective and
supportive environment for children. UNICEF technical assistance will help to
strengthen systems to protect and guarantee children’s rights, particularly the
capacity of the National Child Rights Protection System to provide effective
protection to children from violence, exploitation, abuse and discrimination.
Cooperation will be undertaken with the judiciary to strengthen the capacity of the
juvenile and family branches of the justice system to guara ntee children’s rights.
UNICEF will promote reducing child labour through increased school attendance
and improved academic achievement. Support will be given to national efforts
towards universal access to birth registration, focusing especially on the fi rst year of
life. The strategic allies and counterparts include the National Secretariat for Child
and Adolescent Affairs, the Secretariat for Social Affairs, the Supreme Court of
Justice, Governors’ offices, municipalities, and NGOs that work with child r ights
issues.

9

33. Cross-sectoral costs. These will include costs related to rental of facilities,
utility bills, vehicle maintenance, and salaries and related support expenses for staff.
These costs also will include expenses for technical assistance in su pport of the
country programme and a portion of the operational costs related to implementation,
monitoring and evaluation.

Major partnerships
34. At national, subnational and local levels, UNICEF will cooperate with
Government institutions, NGOs, faith-based organizations and community structures
working to develop innovative, effective, scaleable and sustainable interventions for
the realization of children’s and women’s rights.
35. Government programme partners include the National Secretariat for Child
and Adolescent Affairs, the Secretariat for Social Affairs, the Ministry of Public
Health and Social Welfare, the Ministry of Education and Culture, the Ministry of
Justice and Labour, and the Supreme Court of Justice. Additional partner
Government institutions include the National HIV/AIDS Programme, the General
Directorate for Statistics, Surveys and Censuses, the Technical Secretariat for
Planning, the General Directorate for Environmental Health, and the National
Service for Water and Sanitation.
36. Major NGO and community-based allies include Plan International on
HIV/AIDS, birth registration and WASH; the Children’s Pastoral of the Catholic
Church on ECD and nutrition; Global Infancia (Global Childhood) on child rights;
and indigenous organizations on WASH, basic education, ECD and nutrition.
37. In the spirit of the United Nations reform, UNICEF will continue to promote
greater joint programming, thereby helping to ensure a stronger United Nations
voice in Paraguay. UNICEF will continue its joint project on social investment with
UNDP and UNFPA. Other future opportunities include work with PAHO and
UNFPA on child and maternal health and HIV/AIDS, including capacity-building
for the delivery of basic services at both the central and decentralized levels; with
PAHO on WASH; with ILO on violence, exploitation and abuse against children and
women; with UNFPA on establishing means for the participation of children and
youths and for addressing gender-based inequalities; and with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on food security issues.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
38. Monitoring, research and evaluation activities will be coordinated through the
five-year Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of the UNDAF. Continuing
cooperation with the National Directorate for Statistics, Surveys and Censuses will
help to improve the availability of baseline social data in key areas, disaggregated
by gender, age, ethnicity and geographic area. ParInfo ( DevInfo) will be promoted
as a tool for monitoring the Millennium Development Goals, in conjunction with
other United Nations agencies.
39. Country-specific results-monitoring will be based on the following key
indicators: the under-5 mortality rate; the exclusive breastfeeding rate; the number
of antenatal care visits; the birth registration rate; the percentage of children under
5 suffering from underweight, wasting and stunting; the percentage of the

10

population using improved drinking water sources; the percentage of the population
using adequate sanitation facilities; the percentage of pregnant women undergoing
HIV/AIDS testing; the percentage of primary school children reaching grade 5; and
the per capita budget allocated to social investment.
40. UNICEF and other agencies will continue to share common premises at the
United Nations House, and UNICEF will participate actively in its Management
Committee to optimize the utilization of common premises and services. As for
financial management, UNICEF will adopt and comply with the harmonized
approach to cash transfer, once the system becomes operational in Paraguay.
41. An MTR for the UNDAF and the country programme will be held in 2009.
The programme coordination function will be enhanced to ensure proper links
among the various thematic projects. Programme monitoring and evaluation will be
complemented by routine monitoring activities such as field trips and periodic
reviews with the Government. In line with the rights-based approach to
programming, evaluations will consider the capacity-building of duty bearers,
among other results.
42. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has overall responsibility for coordinating the
country programme, which will continue to participate in and take advantage of
intersectoral coordination mechanisms, including, among others, the National
Commission for the Eradication of Child Labour; the Inter-institutional Group on
Trafficking in Persons; the National Commission for Early Childhood Development;
and the Commission for Monitoring of Penitentiaries.

11

