Peru
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Peru
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.44) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2008)

10.6
21
4
2/8, 9/1
98 a
94/95 b

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

83

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

82

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

68

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

0.4

Child labour (%, 5-14 year-olds, 2007)

34

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2007)
GNI per capita (US$)

93
4 160

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

93

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

91

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
190 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the United Nations
Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World
Bank), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For more
information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html/.
b
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Peru, with a population of approximately 30 million, is 70 per cent urban, and
40 per cent of urban residents reside in Lima. This reflects high urban migration,
especially of Andean and Amazonian indigenous peoples, which peaked during the
internal armed conflict in the 1980s. Lingering fear, compounded by relatively low
levels of investment and development in rural regions, contributes to continued
rural-urban migration. The population is expected to be 74 per cent urban by 2013.
Children and adolescents under 18 account for 37 per cent of the population, while
children under 5 represent 12 per cent.
2.
Fuelled by strong natural gas and mining exports, the economy grew by a n
average of 7 per cent over the last decade. Despite the global economic crisis,
growth is expected to continue, though at the slightly lower rate of approximately
6 per cent annually. Per capita income is expected to reach $6,000 by 2013.
3.
The national budget grew by 77 per cent between 2006 and 2010. Although
social spending increased by an annual average of over 125 per cent, it still is less
than 5 per cent of the gross domestic product, well below the levels required to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals with equity. As decentralization

advances, the percentage of the national budget going to local and regional
governments is growing — from 36 per cent in 2007 to 43 per cent in 2009.
Mechanisms for community, civil society and child/adolescent participation are
limited. So far they are mainly linked to specific demands for infrastructure
projects.
4.
The 2010 Demographic and Health Survey found that Peru has made
significant progress overall on the Millennium Development Goals. Between 2004
and 2010, the infant mortality rate declined from 21 to 17 per 1,000 live births. The
under-five mortality rate fell from 34 to 23, a reduction of 31 per cent annually and
far above the 7 per cent annual reduction required to meet the target for Goal 4.
Between 2000 and 2010, the maternal mortality ratio declined from 190 to 93 per
100,000 live births. As a result, Peru appears likely to reach the Goal 5 target of
76 deaths per 100,000 live births by 2015.
5.
Coverage of services for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
(PMTCT) increased. Peru is one of five countries in the region in which more than
80 per cent of pregnant women were tested for HIV in 2009. In 2010, only 6 per
cent of children born to HIV-positive mothers were infected.
6.
On average, chronic malnutrition declined from 22.6 per cent in 2007 to
17.9 per cent in 2010. However, rates reach as high as 60 per cent in some rural
indigenous regions.
7.
Although net enrolment rates in education have increased in the last decade,
they remain inadequate at the early childhood (55 per cent) and secondary (64 per
cent) levels, and they are much lower in rural indigenous areas. Education quality
needs improvement, as evidenced by the low rate of timely completion of primary
school (66 per cent) and secondary school (39 per cent) in rural areas. Moreover,
only 23 per cent of children achieve age-appropriate levels of reading
comprehension, and only 13 per cent reach age-appropriate levels of proficiency in
mathematics. In rural indigenous areas age-appropriate reading comprehension falls
to 12 per cent and proficiency in math to 7 per cent.
8.
Significant disparities and inequities remain in social indicators by geographic
area, gender, ethnicity and economic quintile. Families in the top inco me quintile
earn 24 times more than families in the lowest quintile. Among all population
groups, the indigenous Amazon population suffers the highest levels of poverty and
economic and social exclusion. Among children whose first language is an Amazon
language, 81 per cent live in poor households and 41 per cent live in extreme
poverty. This compares to 29 per cent poor and 8 per cent extremely poor for
children whose first language is Spanish. The infant mortality rate is as high as 64
per 1,000 in the Amazon, compared to 11 in Lima.
9.
Increasing urban migration by poor rural indigenous people is reflected in
deteriorating or stagnating social indicators in urban coastal regions, which had
previously achieved the child-related targets of Goals 1, 4 and 5. While the highest
under-five mortality rate is found in rural indigenous areas, in absolute numbers
more children die in urban areas. Under-five mortality has been historically higher
in the Amazon than in other areas of the country; however, the total po pulation in
the Amazon is relatively small, and many more children die in urban than in rural
areas. On the other hand, one of every five adolescent girls has experienced
pregnancy in urban areas, while the rate is as high as one in three in rural Amazon

3

areas. This trend is especially worrisome given that less than one third of adolescent
girls say they would request the use of a condom during casual sexual relations,
though 90 per cent of them are aware of HIV/AIDS and how to prevent it.
10. The plight of indigenous and excluded children and adolescents is rooted in
(a) the lack of inclusive policies; (b) significant gaps between their needs and the
supply of public services; (c) limited availability of relevant high -quality data and
analysis for better planning and targeting; (d) limited participation by indigenous
and excluded people in defining policies and strategies, and limited cultural
adaptation of policies and strategies to their needs; (e) inequities in allocation of
public budget and resources; and (f) the overall low priority given to children,
especially of indigenous and excluded families and communities.
11. The protective environment is weak and fragmented, consisting of a
compartmentalized approach to prevention and protection services. The pervasive
culture of violence towards children is manifested in many indicators, including
rampant and widely accepted abuse; a high incidence of child sexual abuse and
exploitation; increasing incidence of child trafficking for sexual exploitation; lack of
alternative measures for adolescents in conflict with the law; the high number of
children and adolescents without parental care; pervasive child labour and
exploitation; and the large number of children and adolescents without birth
registration. Underlying causes include the fact that children and adolescents are not
considered as subjects of rights, and diverse cultural pretexts are used to justify
violence and abuse.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-2011
Key results achieved
12. Significant improvements have been noted in key childhood indicators,
especially in areas where UNICEF cooperates. Between 2000 and 2010, chronic
malnutrition declined in Amazonas, Cusco, Apurimac and Ayacucho by 10 per cent
on average (7 per cent nationally). Neonatal mortality declined by 20 deaths per
1,000 live births in these areas and 8 deaths per 1,000 live births nationally.
13. Important achievements of the programme on policies and advocacy for child
rights include (a) effective positioning of children’s issues during the 2006 and
2010-2011 municipal, regional and presidential elections, with 90 per cent of
candidates committing to specific targets in health, nutrition, education and
protection; (b) inclusion of child-related clauses and 11 priority children’s issues in
each of the 2006-2010 budget laws, resulting in approval and funding of five
strategic programmes, based on advocacy with the National Congress and the
Ministry of Economy and Finance; and (c) design of 100 child -oriented social
investment projects amounting to $34 million in 10 regions, potentially benefiting
over 5 million children and adolescents. UNICEF contributed to raising the profile
of child rights through effective social mobilization and communication f or
development strategies, including the televised Buena Onda (Good Vibes) social
mobilization and fund-raising campaign.
14. The UNICEF emergency response following the 2007 earthquake in Ica
directly supported over 430,000 people. Temporary classrooms an d school-in-a-bag

4

kits allowed 34,390 children to return to school. Over 21,000 received safe water
and psychosocial support, and 2,000 children under 5 received nutrition support.
Technical support was provided to evaluate the emergency response, and the results
were used to give priority to children in national disaster risk reduction and
emergency preparedness and response plans.
15. The programme on development of decentralized capacities for realizing child
rights resulted in (a) establishment of a Secretariat for Children within the
Ombudsperson’s Office (as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child) and creation of a regional network of ombudspersons for children and
adolescents; and (b) approval of a law on residential care (based on a UNICEF
evaluation with the Ombudsperson’s Office), recognizing its transitory and
subsidiary role and the right of children and adolescents to live in a family.
16. Based on advocacy and the evaluation and expansion of the 2000 -2005 Good
Start programme, the Government expanded this strategy to 14 additional regions,
and a national intersectoral and inter-governmental policy was created to reduce
poverty and malnutrition. Together these efforts resulted in a reduction of
malnutrition rates. UNICEF also contributed to reducing anaemia prevalence from
71.9 per cent to 54.2 per cent, and to national adoption of a strategy on anaemia
prevention among children under 3. The strategy, advocated by UNICEF and the
World Food Programme, was based on global research on the effectiveness of multimicronutrient supplements.
17. The country programme contributed to preventing the extinction of the
Kandosi and Shapra indigenous Amazon people through vaccination of all newborns
against hepatitis B between 2003 and 2008. UNICEF also successfully advocated
for adoption of an intercultural bilingual education policy by 16 regional
governments, and provided technical assistance for implementation. The
Ombudsperson’s Office has committed to monitoring the right to pertinent educat ion
for indigenous peoples.
18. At the subnational level, UNICEF contributed to mainstreaming human
development and child priorities in regional and municipal development strategies.
This led to greater social investment and strengthened adolescent partici pation in
formulating local budgets.
Lessons learned
19. Relevant lessons were learned through participatory mechanisms related to the
situation analysis, midterm review and programme reviews. These lessons include:
(a) it is important to mainstream gender and intercultural approaches in social
policy, programme design and implementation in order to address the different
dimensions of social and economic exclusion; (b) decentralizing budgets and
functions must be accompanied by development of local capa city in planning,
budgeting, management and monitoring, in order to narrow gaps between demand
and supply of basic services and ensure proper budget implementation;
(c) communication for development and social mobilization activities are useful for
increasing the visibility of child rights issues and public demand for relevant social
programmes; (d) discussing the situation of children with candidates and political
parties prior to the electoral process helps to position child rights issues on the
public agenda; and (e) technical staff need continuous capacity development on

5

social budget processes to increase the effectiveness of advocacy efforts for
children.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table*
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival and development

560

8 400

8 960

Equitable, quality basic education

210

13 000

13 210

Protection of children and
adolescents

455

6 000

6 455

Policy, social investment and
knowledge generation for
promotion of children’s rights

1 321

6 000

7 321

Cross-sectoral costs

1 204

10 000

11 204

3 750

43 400

47 150

Total

* Figures are only indicative and do not include funds for responding to emergencies.

Preparation process
20. The proposed country programme draws on the recommendations of the 2008
midterm review and UNICEF studies, including the “State of Children in Peru”
(2008 and 2010), the “State of Indigenous Children” (2009) and the “State of Afrodescendant Children” (2011). It also draws on the results of equity and enterprise
risk management assessments (2010) and the 2009 UNICEF -supported evaluation of
the National Plan of Action for Children and Adolescents.
21. The comprehensive and participatory preparation of the 2012-2016 country
programme was managed and led by the UNICEF National Coordinating
Committee, chaired by the Peruvian International Cooperation Agency. It involved
over 230 government, non-governmental, United Nations, private sector and civil
society organizations, including indigenous and adolescents’ organizations.
Seventeen national and regional consultations were organized during 2010 to
discuss the situation of children and adolescents. Scenario -based socio-economic,
political and geo-political analyses were conducted with national experts and linked
to the UNICEF enterprise risk management exercise, ensuring adaptation of
strategies to the shifting policy environment. Six thematic consultations were
organized to develop programme component results and intermediate results, based
on the five medium-term strategic plan focus areas. This was followed by strategic
mapping of partnerships for the expected results. The UNICEF National
Coordinating Committee was convened on four occasions to validate the si tuation
analysis and the draft country programme.
Programme and component results and strategies
22. The 2012-2016 country programme will contribute to positioning child and
adolescent rights at the centre of national and local public policies, progra mmes and
budgets as an indispensable element for achieving and sustaining the Millennium

6

Development Goals with equity. The programme will include a special focus on the
rights of indigenous and excluded children in the Amazon, the Andes and urban
slums. It will seek to strengthen national and local capacities to effectively plan,
budget, implement, monitor and evaluate social policies for children and
adolescents, including in emergencies. Partnerships with civil society, the media,
universities and the private sector will be strengthened, both to demand child rights
and to effectively participate in social monitoring of their achievement.
23. The country programme includes four components: (a) policy, social
investment and knowledge generation for promotion of children’s rights; (b) child
survival and development; (c) equitable, quality basic education; and (d) protection
of children and adolescents.
24. The programme will support (a) generation of evidence -based policies;
(b) increased and more efficient and effective public sector budgets; (c) reduction of
child mortality and malnutrition; (d) promotion of growth and early childhood
development; (e) increased coverage, access, completion, cultural relevance and
quality of education at early childhood, primary and secondary levels; (f) protection
of children and adolescents and prevention of all forms of violence; and
(g) mitigation of the impacts of climate change and disasters on children and
adolescents.
25. Overcoming disparities will largely depend on the capacity and political will
of regional governments and municipalities. The programme will therefore prioritize
nine regions of the Amazon and Andes and some urban marginal areas. It will
address the high and persistent inequities that primarily affect the indigenous and
excluded groups in these areas. UNICEF will support strengthening of regional
governments’ capacity to prioritize children for rights-based planning, results-based
management and effective implementation, in order to make best use of budgets.
26. Key country programme strategies include: (a) intercultural approaches;
(b) gender mainstreaming and equality; (c) family and community participation and
surveillance; (d) child and adolescent participation, including through sport;
(e) partnerships and alliances for corporate social responsibility; (f) collaboration
with centres of excellence to generate knowledge and build local capacities;
(g) strengthening of national and local capacity to develop and implement
appropriate policies for children; (h) documentation and dissemination of best
practices through South-South cooperation and knowledge exchanges among
countries in the region; (i) disaster risk reduction; and (j) capacity building for
emergency preparedness and response.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The country programme reflects the United Nations commitments outlined in
the 2012-2016 United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The
UNDAF in turn recognizes the transcendence of the National Accord, Plan Peru
2021, Plan for International Cooperation, National Plan for International
Cooperation and National Plan of Action for Children and Adolescents 2011 -2021.
Relationship to international priorities
28. The country programme incorporates the key international priorities reflected
in the Millennium Development Goals, the Millennium Declaration and principles,

7

and observations and recommendations of United Nations treaty bodies. These
include the Committee on the Rights of the Child (March 2006), the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (February 2007), the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (September 2009), the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples (July 2007). The programme will also contribute directly t o
achievement of the Education Goals 2021 and the United Nations Secretary General’s Campaign to End Violence against Women. The new programme takes
account of the 2006 recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(to increase budget allocations for the fulfilment of social, economic and cultural
rights of all children, especially the most vulnerable; strengthen information systems
that disaggregate data on the situation of the indigenous and other vulnerable
groups; respect the opinions of children and their right to participate in decisions
that affect them; promote and facilitate timely birth registration; ensure children ’s
right to live in a family; implement measures to ensure that children are protected
from all forms of violence; improve the quality of education; implement measures to
reduce neonatal mortality and mother-to-child transmission of HIV; provide
adequate support to vulnerable groups; among others); and seeks to support the full
implementation of their rights.
Programme components
29. The component on policy, social investment and knowledge generation for
the promotion of children’s rights includes three results. The first is strengthened
public policies and budgets at national, regional and local levels within the
framework of results-based management. UNICEF will partner with the Committee
for Concerted Action in the Fight Against Poverty and national, international and
local stakeholders to conduct timely and specific advocacy for (a) more equitable
allocation of public budgets, (b) a more equitable public sector human resource
policy aimed at increasing the number and quality of social sector staff located in
priority and hard-to-reach regions, and (c) policies to promote accountability for
results at all levels of government and across all sectors.
30. Best practices will be analysed and used to strengthen real-time budget
monitoring, participation by civil society and community surveillance of policy
implementation, as well as more efficient budget utilization. Technic al support and
capacity building will be provided to improve planning, implementation and
monitoring, especially of social protection interventions. UNICEF will also work to
expand the private sector ’s involvement in public policies for children. UNICEF
will seek business support for more government social investment for children, and
will leverage resources from the private sector itself. The programme will support
the national decentralization process, ensuring that programme components can be
replicated in other areas.
31. The second programme result is expanded knowledge and evidence to support
policy advocacy, thus facilitating monitoring and reporting of the situation of
children and adolescents. It will also involve monitoring of implementation of
international commitments and standards, including the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Research and evaluation will generate knowledge on indigenous
and excluded groups in general, with an emphasis on tracking policy effectiveness
and resource allocations in reducing inequities.

8

32. Alliances with knowledge centres and academic institutions will be
strengthened to perform situation analyses and generate evidence and dat a for policy
formulation, programme planning and monitoring and evaluation. Technical support
will also be provided to the National Institute of Statistics and Information for
systematic, disaggregated data collection, analysis and dissemination, and for
guaranteeing the rights of citizens to self-identification in censuses. This, in turn,
will clarify the real extent of ethnic and cultural diversity in Peru. Given the
urbanization trends, it will also increase the focus on urban disparities as a basis for
new lines of advocacy and communication for development strategies.
33. The third programme result is adolescent access (in priority regions) to
relevant gender-sensitive information and opportunities to participate in developing
policies, programmes and services relevant to their ethnic, cultural and geographical
context. This will allow adolescents to recognize, prevent and manage the risks of
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases, early pregnancy, violence, abuse and
exploitation. Advocacy will be conducted to expand the participatory budgets
programme of the Ministry of Economy and Finance to more excluded regions, and
to strengthen the regional capacity of the National Council for Children and
Adolescents.
34. The child survival and development component includes three results. The
first is a 20 per cent reduction in child mortality, with an emphasis on newborns, and
access by at least 90 per cent of pregnant women in priority regions to prenatal care
(including PMTCT and deliveries at institutions) and post-natal care (including
antiretroviral treatment for HIV-positive mothers and newborns).
35. UNICEF will generate evidence to support advocacy for a gender policy that
will emphasize adolescent sexual and reproductive health rights. Evidence will also
be used to advocate for stronger policies for intercultural adaptation of maternal and
child health strategies. This work will be undertaken in coordination with the World
Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization, United Nations Population
Fund, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
and the Peruvian Ministries of Health, Education and Women and Social
Development. Through communication for development and collaboration with
local media, non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations,
UNICEF will seek to strengthen demand for and use of culturally relevant services.
Families will be helped to strengthen care practices, with encouragement for
positive ethnic and cultural practices wherever po ssible.
36. The second result is reduced chronic malnutrition in children under 5 by 20 per
cent and nutritional anaemia by 30 per cent, focusing on priority regions. This
component will build on the significant progress made in reducing chronic
malnutrition. It will concentrate on advocacy to strengthen the National Poverty and
Chronic Malnutrition Reduction Strategy and improve intersectoral and
intergovernmental coherence. UNICEF will advocate to include zinc in the multi micronutrient supplementation policy.
37. The third result is expanded coverage of integrated, participatory early
childhood development programmes to cover at least 30 per cent of children under 5
in priority areas. UNICEF will promote development of public and private
partnerships and strengthening of multisectoral planning and monitoring
mechanisms. The programme will also advocate for early stimulation and childhood
development activities in national and regional budgets.

9

38. Community surveillance of early childhood growth and devel opment will be
strengthened and accompanied by culturally adapted communication for
development approaches to enhance participation of communities and families. The
objective will be to improve integrated approaches in caring for pregnant women,
newborns and children, focusing on nutrition (including breastfeeding), health, early
stimulation and hygiene.
39. The equitable, quality basic education component includes two results. The
first is improved coverage, access, completion, quality and learning achieve ments.
In collaboration with the Ministry of Education and the National Education Council,
the programme will strengthen decentralization of education policy to reduce
geographical disparities. Technical assistance will be provided to improve planning,
resource allocation and management at regional and local levels, supporting
culturally adapted education management. The implementation of the Education
Goals 2021 will be supported, emphasizing inclusion of early childhood and
secondary education within the intercultural bilingual education policy.
40. The second result is better fulfilment of children’s right to quality and
culturally pertinent education and empowerment of children and their families and
communities to demand it. The programme will strengthen its partnership with
community-based groups and will use communication for development to increase
demand for and use of education, especially in rural areas. Technical assistance will
be provided to increase the coverage and quality of teacher training ; gender
mainstreaming strategies; adolescent, family and community participation and
surveillance of education; data collection, research and analysis, and evaluation
systems. UNICEF will advocate with civil society partners, such as Peruvian
Entrepreneurs for Education, to strengthen rights-based approaches.
41. The protection of children and adolescents component seeks to achieve two
main results. The first is a stronger child protection system, particularly the
mechanisms for detecting, caring for and rehabilitating child and adolescent victims
of violence. The programme will provide technical support to national and local
authorities in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Social Development.
The objective will be to strengthen policy and response capacity of public services
for child victims and establish an integrated, comprehensive protection system that
emphasizes gender equality and respect for ethnic and cultural diversity.
42. UNICEF will advocate to enhance the outreach capacity of the N ational Birth
Registration Authority, to help it use good practices to reach children in remote
Amazon areas. Technical assistance will be provided to improve data collection and
analysis to strengthen child protection monitoring systems. The country progr amme
will support implementation of alternatives measures to deprivation of liberty to
protect adolescent rights in the juvenile justice sector. Special efforts will be made
to promote de-institutionalization of children without parental care.
43. The second programme result is that families, communities and protection and
justice institutions adopt attitudes and rearing and caring practices that prevent
violence and promote the best interests of children and adolescents. UNICEF will
collaborate with the media and the Office of the Ombudsperson, among others, to
raise broad awareness about the levels of violence against children. UNICEF will
also contribute to generating knowledge about the underlying causes of violence.
Advocacy and technical assistance at regional and municipal levels will focus on
developing incentive programmes to encourage communities and community -based

10

organizations to model practices for improving intrafamily relations and reducing
violence in the home, school and community.
44. UNICEF will also advocate for mandatory training in basic child rights and
protection for public service officers working directly with children, with
intermediate and advanced training as requirements for promotion. Technical
assistance will be provided to design norms and standards to prevent violence,
especially against girls, in various public services. The objective will be to
strengthen the capacity of national and subnational authorities to integrate positive
cultural knowledge and practices.
45. The programme aims to strengthen the work of the Ombudsperson’s national
and regional offices. Another target is expanding coordination with other allies and
national networks to promote community surveillance of child protection. The
programme will collaborate with the International Organization for Migration and
civil society groups to eradicate sexual exploitation of children and reduce child
labour.
Cross-sectoral costs
46. Cross-sectoral support will contribute to the effective and efficient
management and coordination of the country programme. It will ensure integrated
management of the programme components and technical and administrative
support to zone offices and technical teams. This component will also provide
technical support for gender mainstreaming, communication for development, risk
management, disaster risk reduction and emergency preparedness and response.
Major partnerships
47. Under the leadership of the UNICEF National Coordination Committee,
UNICEF will work within the framework of the UNDAF and with other United
Nations agencies. The programme’s main counterparts are the central government
ministries and agencies and regional and municipal governments. This collaboration
will be undertaken both individually and through the National Association of
Regional Governments and the Network of Urban and Rural Municipalities of Peru.
48. The programme will expand collaboration with the Committee for Concerted
Action in the Fight against Poverty; Ministry of Economy and Finance; National
Council of Girls, Boys and Adolescents; National Institute of Statistics and
Information; Office of the Ombudsperson; and selected universities. The network of
strategic allies will be strengthened, including groups in civil society, the private
sector, national and international non-governmental organizations, and community
and faith-based organizations.
49. Technical exchange will be strengthened with international financial
institutions, including the World Bank, to finance scaling-up of successful activities.
The private sector will be increasingly engaged for policy advocacy partnerships
and fund-raising. UNICEF will aim to maintain successful working relations with
the main donors to Peru. UNICEF will collaborate with and complement the efforts
of the Association of Regional Governments, Committee for Concerted Action in the
Fight Against Poverty, Ministry of Economy and Finance, and the National
Congress.

11

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
50. The Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be prepared jointly with
the country programme action plan and linked with the UNDAF monitoring and
evaluation system. Special attention will be paid to evaluating regional and local
achievements. The monitoring plan will include research, studies, ev aluations and
basic indicators. DevInfo will play a fundamental role, having been adopted in 2005
as the system for monitoring the Millennium Development Goals and UNDAF
progress indicators.
51. UNICEF will support implementation of the UNDAF midterm revi ew in 2014,
along with counterparts, taking into account observations and recommendations
made to Peru by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Monitoring and
evaluation activities will continue to include annual plans, field visits, progress
reports and annual reviews.
52. The UNICEF National Coordinating Committee is responsible for
consultations on, approvals for, and monitoring of the country programme. It meets
at least twice a year and is comprised of high-level representatives from each of the
ministries and local governments with which UNICEF works directly.

12

