Philippines
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Philippines
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.7) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

37.0

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

33

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2008)

22 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

160 b
91/93 c

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

73 c

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

91 d

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

76 d

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 1999)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2000)
(male/female, urban/rural)

<0.1
12
83
83/83, 87/78

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

87 e

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

88 e

†
a
b

c

d

e

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org.
Birth to 60 months. World Health Organization child growth standard.
94 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the United Nations
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World
Bank, together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/
maternal_mortality.html.
Basic Information Education System data: Net enrolment ratio (per cent): 85.1 (total),
84.6 (male), 85.7 (female). Survival rate: Total = 78.32%.
National Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) 2008 data: Water = 90.1%, sanitation =
65.8%.
NDHS 2008: DPT3 = 85.6%, measles = 84.5%. These survey results confirm the country ‟s
administrative coverage figures (which form the basis for the WHO/UNICEF estimate) and
the NDHS 2008 data for children vaccinated by 12 months of age: DPT3 = 82.8% and
measles = 76.2%.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The Philippines is an archipelago of over 7,000 islands with a population of
nearly 89 million. It has a presidential for m of government, and law-making is
vested in a bicameral Congress. Since July 2010, a new democratically elected
administration has initiated reform articulated in the Philippines Development Plan,
2011-2016. The plan prioritizes achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and is complemented by a flagship conditional cash transfer (CCT) programme and
a newly energized peace process. The reform faces challenges in rectifying deeply
rooted social, economic and political inequalities.
2.
The 2008 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child on the third and fourth Philippines State party reports commended some key
measures and progress in promoting and protecting the rights of children. These
included the passage into law of a women‟s rights law (the “Magna Carta of
Women”) and the Juvenile Justice Welfare Act of 2006 and abolition of the death

2

penalty for juveniles and adults. However, in 2009 the Committee noted the need to
coordinate and increase budgetary allocations for children. It highlighted the need
for legislation and implementation of laws on corporal punishment, promotion of
awareness of child rights and improved data collection and dissemination. The
Committee made particular reference to vulnerable groups of children, in cluding
those in areas vulnerable to disasters and conflict and those affected by any form of
abuse, including children with disabilities.
3.
The economy has grown at an average of 6 per cent per year since 2005, and
the country‟s Human Development Index has improved. However, serious structural
problems threaten the sustainability of these gains. Child poverty remains high, at
41 per cent, as does inequality, as indicated by a Gini co -efficient of 0.448. Regional
disparities have increased due mainly to the pattern of growth led by the private
sector, a bias towards the rich in budget allocations, low revenue base, corruption
and low investment in social sectors (less than 4 per cent of gross domestic product,
or GDP). Certain provinces of Visayas and Mindanao suffer deeply from social
inequities. Non-State-sponsored armed insurgencies give rise to human security
risks, as do rising tensions in the area of the South China Sea and vulnerability to
natural disasters and climate change. These challenges also c onstrain the availability
of resources to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
4.
The Philippines is on track to meet most of the national Millennium
Development Goals, including gender equality. However, under-achievement in
primary education, maternal mortality and HIV/AIDS reflects critical investment
gaps. While the under-five mortality target is likely to be met, high rates of neonatal
mortality and malnutrition remain a significant challenge. Early childhood care and
development (ECCD) coverage is low, at 33 per cent. School dropout rates are high,
mostly among boys, in the first two years of elementary education, mainly attributed
to poverty. Around 20 million Filipinos lack access to sanitation, as do over half the
public schools. Although national HIV prevalence remains below 1 per cent, new
cases among 15- to 24-year-olds have increased fivefold in two years. Knowledge of
HIV prevention is low among high-risk 15- to 17-year-olds, and access to services is
limited.
5.
Children continue to be recruited and used in armed conflicts. The Philippines
was prioritized in 2007 by the United Nations Security Council for implementation
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave child rights violations under
resolution 1612 (2005). There are knowledge and data gaps on child vulnerabilities.
The number of internally displaced families rose to 158,000 at the height of fresh
armed conflict in some provinces of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
in August 2008. The peace talks have since resumed, and the number of displaced
families was reduced to 35,000 by October 2010.
6.
The Philippines lies along the so-called typhoon belt facing the Pacific Ocean
within the Pacific “Ring of Fire” and is severely affected by climate change. This
vulnerability is multiplied by uncontrolled settlement in disaster-prone areas, as well
as high poverty rates, lack of adherence to building codes and degradation of forests
and coastal resources, among other factors. In 2009, typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng
affected 9.3 million persons, resulting in losses estimated at 27 per cent of GDP.
7.
The Constitution and the Local Government Unit (LGU) Code of 1991 provide
for a highly decentralized LGU system consisting of provinces, cities, municipalities
and barangays. It provides for an effective institutional mechanism to deliver social

3

services and address inequity. The policy environment is amenable to influence by
civil society, which is represented by a rich mix of non -governmental organizations,
including faith-based institutions. The private sector is strong, and social
responsibility and individual giving are significant strengths that could be harnessed
to realize child rights.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2011
Key results achieved
8.
The 2007 midterm review of the country programme and a 2008 programme
performance assessment led by the Office of Internal audit highlighted the key role
of UNICEF in creating and developing various children‟s rights networks and
coalitions in the Philippines. The assessment recognized the capacity of UNICEF in
advocacy, its strong awareness of local planning and budgeting, and its skilful
engagement with legislative processes. A country programme evaluation completed
in 2010 further confirmed that the objectives set in the programme were relevant to
the needs and priorities of the Philippines and that UNICEF had made notable
contributions to enhancing government capabilities to implement the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
9.
On the legislative and policy front, the programme evaluation noted that
UNICEF is credited with important contributions by providing key and timely
technical, legal, financial and advocacy support. The law on child pornography was
enacted in 2009, and other laws — including on children affected by armed conflict,
on the age of sexual consent and on corporal punishment — were filed in Congress.
The passage of the Juvenile Justice Welfare Act (2006), the implementing rules and
regulations of the National Guidelines for the Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes
(2007) and the Expanded Breastfeeding Promotion Act (2010) were reported as
having had multiplier effects.
10. The evaluation also highlighted the contribution of the education programme
to access to ECCD services, with support from the Australian Government Overseas
Aid Program (AusAid). It noted that the percentage of children aged 3 to 5 receiving
ECCD services grew from 30 per cent in 2004 to 56 per cent in 2009. This
programme involved support for national policies, standards, learning materials and
national plans to improve centre-based early childhood development services and to
institutionalize and expand home-based ECCD through innovative models.
Lessons learned
11. The midterm review found the integrated, multi-sectoral approach of the
current country programme to be rich in concept but overly complex, especially
regarding the results framework, and hindered by a lack of adequate data. This led
to reliance mainly on sector-level strategies at the expense of the full realization of
cross-sectoral synergies. It was recommended that UNICEF clarify its role so as to
maximize its comparative advantage and use of resources. The new country
programme is based on a robust vulnerability analysis and clear articul ation of
intended results that foster integration and cohesion.

4

12. In 2010, UNICEF identified the need to take fuller account of emerging risks
for children from rising regional disparities, climate change and increasing natural
disasters and conflicts. It was noted that these challenges contribute significantly to
poverty and perpetuate inequities. It was recommended that UNICEF develop
specific responses to vulnerabilities of children by region and income level. This has
been addressed by developing a specific result aimed at improving human security
and mitigating risks.
13. The country programme evaluation in 2010 noted that many stakeholders and
partners appreciated the broad scope of the engagement of UNICEF for children, but
to better ensure relevance it urged UNICEF to focus on fewer roles, sectors,
activities, geographic areas and partners. Taking this into account, the new country
programme clearly defines its scope of engagement through baseline indicators,
mapping of risks by region and evidence-based targeting of resources. For instance,
UNICEF will work in the health sector only in regions where skilled birth
attendance coverage is less than 50 per cent.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Other resources

Regular resources

Total

Millennium Development Goals achieved with equity

40 700

6 310

47 010

Social policy and risk mitigation

24 200

2 675

26 875

5 100

6 510

11 610

70 000

15 495

85 495

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
14. In August 2008, the Government recommended deferring the start of the
country programme and the new United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF), covering the period 2012-2018, to align with the
Government‟s next development plan (Philippines Development Plan 2011 -2016).
Preparation of the new programme started with implementation of the
recommendations to streamline the programme after the midterm review, followed
by province-level discussions from March to October 2008. Programme discussions
were also held during the 2008 programme performance assessment.
15. These were followed by an external evaluation of the present and previous
country programmes, completed in 2010. Key events in planning for the ne w
programme were a consultative Strategic Moment of Reflection (April 2010) and
strategy meeting (October 2010) in partnership with the National Economic and
Development Authority. These drew on the outcomes of a participatory gender audit
completed in April 2010. In February 2011, a final draft of the country programme
document was presented to the National Steering Committee. The country
programme was prepared in coordination with the UNDAF and the new programmes
of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and World Food Programme.

5

Programme and component results and strategies
16. The country programme will contribute to progressive realization of children‟s
rights in line with government priorities to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. Component 1 focuses on services and systems („downstream‟) to address
inequities and therefore contribute to achieving national Millennium Development
Goals by 2015. Component 2 focuses on policy initiatives („upstrea m‟) to put in
place an improved human security and social policy framework by 2016 to mitigate
risks arising from inequities, conflict and natural disasters.
17. UNICEF efforts will focus on a subset of vulnerable geographic regions
identified by the Government in the Philippines Development Plan as suffering from
the highest levels of inequity. To ensure that interventions are sustainable and scaled
up, UNICEF will work primarily through public sector institutions (LGUs) as the
main instruments of service delivery and systems-building. The level of engagement
with government institutions will take into account capacities, economies of scale
and sector issues. Lessons from this approach will be used for development of
policies to address specific risks and encourage nationwide implementation.
18. Within the context of limited investment in the social sectors, and guided by
the human rights-based approach, UNICEF will advocate and leverage resources for
children and promote efficient use of resources by the LGUs. Vulnerable
populations will be emphasized, and UNICEF will work in close alignment with the
government-led CCT programme. Institutional incentives will be created for LGUs
to encourage investment in improving social outcomes. They will receive grants to
invest in children based on good performance (verified through community-based
monitoring).
19. Policy, public advocacy and knowledge management will form a core pillar of
efforts to improve the human security environment and develop strategic
partnerships for children. This will be advanced in two ways. First, UNICEF will
build and strengthen partnerships, advocate for reducing disparities, stress
peacebuilding and strengthen disaster preparedness. Second, within the context of
South-South cooperation, UNICEF will take the lead in promoting the use of proven
practices to advance children‟s rights and develop programmes and policies based
on sound evidence. This will be undertaken jointly with other United Nations
agencies within the context of the UNDAF.
20. Communication for Development will complement advocacy to encourage
positive community behaviours. Multiple communication channels will be employed
to target important care practices such as encouraging exclusive breastfeeding and
micronutrient supplementation. Community efforts will be undertaken to raise
awareness of HIV and AIDS among high-risk young people and of significant child
protection issues, such as violence and abuse. Disaster risk reduction capacity will
be strengthened in collaboration with partners to equip communities with knowledge
of preparedness.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
21. The country programme is closely aligned with the Philippines Development
Plan and relevant sectoral policies. Education initiatives will contribute to the 2015
Education for All plan and to the Basic Education Sector Reform Agenda. For the
health sector, efforts will align with the newly announced Aquino Health Agenda,

6

National Objectives for Health (2012-2016) and the Philippines Medium-Term Plan
of Action on Nutrition. For child protection, the foundation will be the extended
Comprehensive Programme on Child Protection and related national plans.
22. The peacebuilding programme component aligns with the government -led
Promoting the Peace project to enhance delivery of social services in conflict -prone
areas. Disaster risk reduction activities will be guided by the “Guidelines on
mainstreaming disaster risk reduction in subnational development” and the National
Framework on Climate Change.
23. The UNDAF has four outcomes, and UNICEF will contribute directly to three:
by 2018 (a) the poor and vulnerable will have better access to quality social
services, with a focus on the Millennium Development Goals; (b) more citizens,
especially the poor and disadvantaged, will be empowered to exercise their human
rights and participate in governance processes that promote development, peace,
justice, equality, integrity, accountability and inclusivity; and (c) vulnerable
communities and natural ecosystems will be resilient to threats, shocks, disasters
and climate change.
Relationship to international priorities
24. The programme supports the Millennium Declaration and the Millennium
Development Goals. It will address the Concluding Observations o f the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and the content of the two Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, as well as the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The programme will continue to
support the monitoring and reporting mechanism for grave child rights violations in
situations of armed conflict, as mandated by Security Council Resolutions 1539 and
1612, and the Paris Principles on children associated with armed forces or armed
groups. The programme supports the Government in monitoring performance of
these mechanisms.
Programme components
25. Millennium Development Goals achieved with equity. This component
works to improve targeting of public resources in selected vulnerable LGUs through
three major results. The first result aims to increase access to high -impact
preventive services and behaviour change interventions in vulnerable and poor
LGUs with high incidence of child mortality and HIV. The programme will work to
increase access to skilled birth attendance in seven regions with low rates of
coverage and high underweight prevalence; and to reduce child mortality, improve
nutritional status and increase access to fortified foods. It will also work to increase
access to adequately iodized salt for 90 per cent of households in the poorest LGUs.
26. The programme aims to improve household knowledge on immunization,
deworming and exclusive breastfeeding; improve government capacity for
procurement services; strengthen policy and programming frameworks, such as for
infant and young child feeding, universal salt iodization, community management of
acute malnutrition and food fortification; increase access to safe water and basic
sanitation services and improve hygiene behaviour, target ing municipalities with
sanitation coverage of less than 45 per cent; and strengthen capacities of national
government agencies and three LGUs to implement and oversee HIV prevention
activities for children, young people and women most at risk.

7

27. UNICEF will work on this component with both international partners (United
Kingdom Department for International Development, United States Agency for
International Development, AusAid, European Union, UNFPA, World Health
Organization, United Nations Joint Programme on HIV/AIDS and the Global
Alliance for Improved Nutrition) and national partners (Departments of Health,
Education, and Interior and Local Government; Philippines National AIDS Council;
non-governmental organizations; the private sector; and young peo ple).
28. The focus of the second result is increasing access to ECCD and elementary
education in the 15 most vulnerable LGUs. The programme will emphasize gender
parity, policy adaptation for national legislation and higher budget allocations.
Children aged 3 to 11 will receive special attention, with a focus on improving
ECCD and elementary basic education. These interventions are expected to increase
enrolment and reduce dropouts and to contribute to a 5 per cent increase in the
national primary school net enrolment rate by 2015.
29. The programme will support evidence-based advocacy and development of
national and local plans to scale up innovations to improve school readiness,
completion rates and gender disparities. It will support peace efforts by as sisting in
development of the peace education curriculum and providing technical assistance
to bring Islamic madrasas into the national education regulatory framework. In
partnership with the CCT programme, UNICEF will also address health and
nutrition, violence, discriminatory practices and disruptions caused by disasters,
within the school context. It will encourage participation of children, teachers and
communities in school improvement initiatives, such as adoption of child -friendly
methods to improve learning.
30. Key partners include the Department of Education, Department of Social
Welfare and Development, ECCD Council and LGUs.
31. The objective of the third result of this component is to improve national and
local public sector institutional frame works. This would increase access to wellcoordinated child protection services for the most vulnerable children in at least five
disadvantaged LGUs. This result is expected to improve policy, legislative and
national institutional frameworks. Those in turn should enable the Government to
ensure the child protection system is a well-coordinated core public service and to
establish and improve access to child protection services in five disadvantaged
LGUs.
32. UNICEF will support provision of high-quality technical advice on policy,
legislative and institutional frameworks to relevant public sector organizations so
they will have the capacities to establish a national child protection service. Support
will be provided to enact laws and improve services by reinforcing capacities and
accountabilities of public sector professionals and LGUs, particularly in high risk areas targeted through the CCT modality.
33. Partners include the Council for Welfare of Children; Departments of Social
Welfare and Development, Justice, Interior and Local Government, and Education;
Philippines National Police; UNFPA, regarding gender-based violence; World
Health Organization, on violence against children; and the International Labour
Organization, on child labour.
34. Social policy and risk mitigation. This component focuses on improving
human security and leveraging resources through strategic policy analysis, advocacy

8

and partnerships. The main objective is to contribute to government initiatives to
mitigate risks arising from inequities, disparities, conflict and natural disasters,
through three result areas.
35. The first result of this component focuses on strengthening knowledge, data
and policy analysis to formulate equity-driven national social sector policies, social
protection plans (e.g., CCTs) and budgets to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. The programme will support the Government‟s strategy to put equity at the
heart of the development agenda through incentives and performance -based
mechanisms (specifically, matching grants based on improved social outcomes) for
the most vulnerable LGUs. It will also work to ensure that child rights and gender
equality receive priority, accompanied by fiscal allocations, in national and local
policies, poverty reduction and social protection programmes. It will integrate child
rights indicators into provincial and city government reports in targeted LGUs. This
will be achieved in partnership with the National Economic and Development
Authority and its regional planning centres, the Department of Budget and
Management, the Department of Social Welfare and Development, and public
interest and political institutions.
36. The second result aims to advance peace by providing technical and other
assistance to improve delivery of social services and collection and use of data.
Conflict analysis will be improved and conflict prevention and peace -promoting
initiatives will be mainstreamed into national and local development plans. These
will include action plans led by UNICEF to demobilize and integrate child soldiers,
as well as increasing access to basic social services in areas vulnerable to conflict.
UNICEF will collaborate closely with the CCT programme and the Office of the
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process. Working with the United Nations system,
particularly with Act for Peace initiative of UNDP, UNICEF will provide sustained
support to the country‟s task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations
of child rights in armed conflict. This will include support for i mplementation of
action plans and strategies with State and non-State parties.
37. Result three aims to improve the capacity of national and local public sector
institutions to prepare for and mitigate the impacts of emergencies and hazards,
using the cluster approach in line with the UNICEF Core Commitments for Children
in Humanitarian Action. UNICEF will work with the National Disaster Risk
Reduction Management Council and its subnational counterparts in vulnerable
provinces to improve national institutional and policy frameworks for implementing
the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act. This will be achieved by
mainstreaming disaster risk reduction in national and local development policies of
vulnerable LGUs. This result will also contribute to imp roving implementation of
the disaster management programme by building the capacity of staff of the Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management Office. This effort will emphasize local levels and
partnerships to enhance advocacy in schools and communities prone to disasters.
38. Cross-sectoral costs. This component, which contributes to achievement of
the other results, comprises advocacy communication, resource mobilization,
partnerships and programme coordination, and monitoring and evaluation.
Advocacy communication will capitalize on the vibrant civil society and media in
the Philippines to ensure widespread participation in social change processes.
Advocacy will capitalize on the growth of giving and corporate social responsibility,
focusing attention on long-term relationships with individuals, businesses and the

9

public sector to invest resources in children and support their cause. UNICEF will
continue to raise funds for emergencies through emergency appeals.
39. Expected results are that media reports and public mobilization persuade
decision makers to take action to accelerate achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals with equity. Through resource mobilization and partnerships,
$5 million is to be raised in support of the country programme budget, and at least
two private sector partnerships are to be established. UNICEF will also support
strengthened planning, coordination and implementation in support of programme
results in line with government priorities.
Major partnerships
40. To address the areas in which the Millennium Development Goals are lagging,
the programme will intensify partnerships with leading government policymaking
bodies and regional planning bodies, especially those based in the Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao, Mindanao Development Authority and other
coordinating bodies, as well as with the Asian Development Bank, World Bank,
bilateral donors, academic institutions, local governments and the private sector.
UNICEF will continue to coordinate with the Department of Forei gn Affairs. Within
the framework of the UNDAF, UNICEF will work with other United Nations
agencies to leverage resources for children.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
41. The country programme will be guided by a National Steering Committee that
includes major government agencies, NGOs and donor representatives. A smaller
Executive Committee, co-chaired by the National Economic and Development
Authority and the Council for the Welfare of Children/Department of Social Welfare
and Development, will advise on operational and administrative issues at national,
regional and local levels. It will also plan meetings of the National Steering
Committee. A midterm review is planned in 2014, at which time achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals will be assessed. In 2016, the country programme
will be evaluated through an “equity lens”.
42. Strategic results-based monitoring will be centred on indicators identified
through gap and vulnerability analysis, with baselines and annual targets. Re porting
against indicators will use existing national systems where possible, including the
national Millennium Development Goals monitoring system governed by the
National Statistical Coordination Board and the National Economic and
Development Authority. The local government performance measurement system
under the Department of Interior and Local Government will be used for annual
performance monitoring, in addition to information systems used by line
departments. To monitor equity dimensions, UNICEF will collaborate with the
National Statistical Coordination Board and sister United Nations agencies, as well
as with academic and research centres. This cooperation will cover statistical
analysis, survey data and small area estimation techniques to provide evidence on
the impact of poverty reduction programmes.
43. Equity-focused interventions will be evaluated to inform UNICEF efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals. UNICEF will also partner with the
monitoring and evaluation department of the National Economic and Development
Authority to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation network in the Philippines

10

and develop country-led systems and standards. National policies and guidelines on
evaluation will also be reviewed with the goal of ensuring systematic evaluation of
policies. Public advocacy work will also be evaluated to sharpen the focus of this
important strategy.
44. UNICEF will maintain its office in the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao in view of the multiple vulnerabilities affectin g children there, including
severe lags in development, conflict, natural disasters and widespread child poverty.
45. Key findings, good practices and lessons learned will be widely disseminated
through studies, reviews and evaluations of programmes relev ant to an equityfocused approach. Such knowledge sharing will be used as a strategic element of
South-South cooperation and in regional and national venues such as the Philippines
Development Forum.

11

