Rwanda
Common country programme document
2013-2018

The draft common country programme document for Rwanda
(DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2013/RWA/1 and Add.3), was
approved, on an exceptional basis, in accordance with decision
2012/10 by the UNICEF Executive Board at its 2013 annual session
(18-21 June 2012).
The document was discussed at a joint informal consultation
on 21 May 2013. This final version, which includes the UNICEF
results and resources framework, was approved at the 2013 annual
session of the Executive Board on 21 June 2013.

Contents
Page
I.

Situation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Past cooperation and lessons learned. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

III.

Proposed programme. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

IV.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

Annex
UNICEF results and resources framework for Rwanda, 2013-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

2

Situation analysis1

I.

1.
Beginning in 2008, Rwanda accelerated implementation of Vision 2020 –
which aims for the country to achieve middle-income status by 2020 – while
maintaining its strong commitment to attaining the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). The country continued to own and lead its development process in a
particularly innovative and committed way, and registered very positive development
results during this period. These are reflected in aid effectiveness, the high levels of
inclusive economic growth, significant poverty reduction, gender empowerment and
notable progress towards achieving the MDGs.
2.
In the period 2008-2012, gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged
7.7 per cent annually and GDP per capita growth averaged 5.1 per cent; both
averages were much higher than averages for sub-Saharan Africa. Income per capita
reached US$580 in 2012, the second-highest in East Africa. Rwanda sustained a
prudent macroeconomic management regime, which kept inﬂation within the single digit limit and the exchange rate relatively stable, while utilizing a “fiscal space
approach” in its growth and poverty-reduction strategies.
3.
Rwanda reinforced broad macroeconomic reforms with sustained
improvements in the business environment. These were reflected in a dramatically
improved ranking in the World Bank’s Doing Business 2012 report, 2 from 150 th in
2008 to 45 th in 2012 – making Rwanda one of the most reforming economies in the
world. They also stimulated a budding entrepreneurial revolution in the country,
including in the information and communications technology sector .
4.
Core components of the Government’s broad-based growth and poverty
reduction strategies in 2008-2012 were to increase smallholder productivity,
particularly in rural areas, and to expand provision of financial services that are
inclusive of vulnerable segments of the population, with due attention to gender
aspects. The former included consolidating land, providing inputs, improving
extension services and strengthening farmer cooperatives, which significantly
increased production of staple food and export crops. Expanded financial services
resulted in 72 per cent of the population having access to basic financial services.
5.
Notwithstanding Rwanda’s rapid economic growth during the past five years,
its productive base remained narrow. The economic structure was dominated by
agriculture (32 per cent of GDP in 2011) and the services sector (47 per cent). The
industrial sector accounted for only 15 per cent of GDP formation. The
competitiveness of industrial exports continued to be challenged by a narrow
domestic market and Rwanda’s landlocked position, which renders transportation
costs high.
6.
Furthermore, despite gains in agricultural output, a 2012 study 3 found that
21 per cent of Rwandan households were food-insecure, with the highest prevalence
__________________
1

All data cited in this document, unless noted otherwise, come from the Economic Integrated Household
Survey 2010 and Demographic and Health Survey 2010.

2

World Bank. 2011. Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World.
Washington, DC.

3

Comprehensive food security and vulnerability analysis (CFSVA).

3

(42 per cent) in Western Province. The most food-insecure households were those of
low-income agriculturalists, farm workers and unskilled daily labourers.
Agriculturalists account for 85 per cent of the population, and 60 per cent of farming
households cultivate plots smaller than half an hectare. Households in the two lowest
income quintiles account for 73 per cent of food-insecure households in the country.
7.
The prevalence of stunting among children under 5 remained high at
44 per cent, with higher rates in the rural areas of Northern Province (60 per cent).
Food insecurity and chronic malnutrition are closely linked, with poverty as the root
cause. 3 The Government has acknowledged the importance of nutrition to the
development of young children and made the elimination of malnutrition a national
priority.
8.
Owing to heavy reliance on rainfed agriculture, both for rural livelihoods and
major exports, Rwanda remains highly vulnerable to climate change and associated
increased temperatures and rains. Floods and storms could trigger more landslides,
crop losses, health risks and damage to the infrastructure.
9.
Rwanda’s high population density – the highest in Africa at 416 people per km 2
– is a significant development challenge. A high population growth rate of
2.6 per cent 4 and a high total fertility rate of 4.6 children per woman constrain
poverty-reduction efforts. Only about 45 per cent of married women use
contraceptives. Moreover, only 19 per cent of women who do not want to have
another child, or who would like to wait to conceive again, have access to
contraception.
10. Another major development challenge for the country is the high level of youth
unemployment, which is linked to high population growth, a youthful populace,
skills mismatch (i.e. skills that young people have do not match those demanded by
the market), and a job creation rate that lags behind that of new entries into the
labour market. The current annual job creation rate of 105,000 is substantially lower
than Vision 2020’s target of 200,000. On average, 40 per cent of youth lack the
requisite skills to join the labour market. This, coupled with limited job expansion,
means that over 42 per cent of young people are either unemployed or
underemployed in subsistence agriculture. Well- formulated employment policies
exist, but more needs to be done to translate them into tangible impacts. 5
11. The Government made achieving the MDGs central to its development
strategy. Three years ahead of 2015, Rwanda achieved or was on track to achieving
all the MDGs, with the exception of MDG 1. The poverty rate was reduced by
12 percentage points between 2005/2006 and 2010/2011, implying that 1 million
people were pulled out of poverty, with the sharpest declines re gistered in the rural
areas. With 44.9 per cent of the population living below the poverty line in 2011, the
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy I (EDPRS I) target of
reducing the proportion of people living in poverty from 56.9 per cent in 2005/2006
to 46 per cent in 2012/2013 was met. Furthermore, in terms of the human
development index ranking, Rwanda moved up seven places between 2008 and 2011.
__________________
4

2012 National Population Census.

5 African

Economic Outlook – Rwanda. Available at:
http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/countries/east-africa/rwanda/.

4

12. However, at about 45 per cent, the poverty rate remains high, and in spite of the
gains made towards the reduction of inequalities, the Gini coefficient, at 0.49, also
remains high. Social protection is an important part of Rwanda’s poverty reduction
strategy, focusing mainly on cash transfers to extremely poor households, paid
labour-intensive works and credit access for the rural poor, but coverage is limited. A
major objective of EDPRS II could include providing full coverage of potential
beneficiaries and improving implementation and monitoring. In terms of child
protection, the Government will prioritize implementation of a comprehensive
strategy to reform the childcare system, starting with children living in institutional
care.
13. Rwanda is on track to achieve universal access to primary school education
by 2015 with a primary net enrolment rate of 95.4 per cent (97 per cent for girls).
The qualified teacher/pupil ratio at primary level is 1:58, with over 90 per cent
attendance. All children are entitled to 12 years of free education; education is
compulsory for children aged 7 to 16 years. Challenges remaining are the low quality
of education, large disparities between urban and rural populations and among
income quintiles, meeting the needs of children with disabilities, and providing
skills-based education aligned to labour market demands. Early childhood
development (ECD) is becoming a priority; however, only 10 per cent of children
aged 3 to 6 have access to ECD services.
14. Access to basic health services is near universal: 91 per cent of the population
has access to health insurance coverage, and health care is community-based.
Rwanda is steadily reducing child mortality, with the highest reduction in
East Africa. The Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation estimated infant
mortality to have declined from 86 to 38 per 1,000 and child mortality from 152 to
54 per 1,000 between 2005 and 2011. Immunization coverage is above 95 per cent
for children under 5; vaccines for human papillomavirus, rotavirus and pneumonia
were introduced during the period under review.
15. Maternal mortality decreased from 750 to 487 per 100,000 live births between
2005 and 2010 but the rate is still high, especially among women aged 15 to 24, who
account for 47 per cent of maternal deaths. Inequalities persist in access to health
services for the rich and the poor. Other challenges include inadequate quality of
services, limited availability of emergency obstetric and newborn care services,
shortage of skilled health providers, insufficient equipment and supplies, and certain
cultural practices. In addition, at 43 per cent, the prevalence of chronic malnutrition
remains unacceptably high.
16. The prevalence of HIV is relatively low at 3 per cent among people
aged 15 to 49. HIV/AIDS awareness is quite high and 94 per cent of adults requiring
anti-retroviral treatment have access to it. However, regional variations exist,
with 7.1 per cent prevalence in Kigali City compared with 2.3 per cent in rural areas.
HIV prevalence is highest among people aged 25 to 49, with prevalence rates
reaching 6.7 per cent among those aged 40 to 44 and 51 per cent among sex workers.
A gender variation is also evident; among men aged 15 to 49, the prevalence rate
is 3.7 per cent and among women the same age it is 2.2 per cent. There is need for
government policy to focus on these vulnerable groups and on prevention of
mother-to-child transmission in order to attain the objective of zero prevalence.

5

17. Rwanda has registered notable progress in the area of gender empowerment.
One area that stands out is the high representation of women in Parliament:
56 per cent. The proportion of girls to boys in primary school enrolment is
102 per cent. Nevertheless, women in Rwanda continue to face challenges: more
households headed by women live in poverty (47 per cent) than those headed by men
(44.3 per cent). Literacy rates are lower for women (60 per cent) than for men
(70 per cent), which limits women’s opportunities for accessing resources, creating
and managing small businesses, and participating in household decision-making
processes. Gender-based violence among women and girls remains an area of serious
concern; in 2010, at least 56 per cent of women aged 15 to 49 had experienced
physical or sexual violence.
18. The Government improved its capacity to produce development data through
the population census 2012, health and demographic surveys and national household
surveys. Challenges remain to analyse and utilize information for evidence-based
policymaking and for monitoring and evaluation (M&E), especially at decentralized
levels.
19. In the area of governance, Rwanda has made significant advances in national
reconciliation, law and order, and accountability, along with rebuilding and
strengthening national capacity for good governance through home -grown initiatives
such as the gacaca courts. 6 Notable advances have also been made in public-sector
reforms and decentralization, as well as anti-corruption measures. Transparency
International’s 2011 Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Rwanda 49 out of
180 countries surveyed, 40 positions higher than in 2009.
20. Despite the gains made in democratic governance, important challenges remain
in reinforcing inclusive participation and strengthening political processes by
addressing the issues of political space, weaknesses in the capacities of civil society
and the need to accelerate media-sector reforms. In the area of public administration,
significant improvements are required in inter-sectoral policy and programme
coordination, more use of evidenced-based planning, and closing important capacity
gaps in the middle-level categories. In the area of the rule of law, there is scope for
more judicial reforms that will improve access to justice, reduce the backlog of cases
and improve the quality of prosecution processes. Crime rates have been reduced
significantly, dropping 12 per cent between 2011 and 2012 alone. However, more
progress can be made by strengthening the prevention and response capacity of the
Rwanda National Police and further expanding community policing.
21. To address these challenges, and in line with Vision 2020, the Government has
formulated in a participatory manner a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy and
transformational agenda, which is set out in the EDPRS II (2013 -2018). In the
context of this strategy, the Government plans to shift the agrarian-based economy
over the next five years to a knowledge-based economy, underpinned by an annual
economic growth of 11.5 per cent. It also aims to increase industrial production and
exports and expand the services and tourism sectors by increasing investment in
these areas and filling skills gaps. Another important element of this strategy is to
__________________
6

6

The gacaca courts are part of a system of community justice inspired by tradition and established in
Rwanda in 2001 in the wake of the 1994 Rwandan genocide. They are part of a method of transitional
justice, designed to promote healing and to enable the society to move on from the crisis.

take advantage of increasing integration in the East African Community and broader
regional and global markets in order to overcome serious constraints related to the
country’s small market size and landlocked position.
22. The suspension of direct budget support to Rwanda by key donors following
the findings of the United Nations Group of Experts report of 15 November 2012 on
recurring violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo could hinder
achievement of the ambitious goals set out in the EDPRS II. Continuing instability in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo also triggers influxes of refugees into
Rwanda, putting serious pressures on the social services and security of host
communities; since April 2012 there have been over 27,000 new arrivals in Rwanda.
It is hoped that the ongoing regional peace talks will gain traction, reinforced by the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region signed in February 2013, thereby attenuating these potentially
important risk factors for Rwanda’s medium-term transformational agenda.

II. Past cooperation and lessons learned
23. The United Nations contributed to the positive development results Rwanda
achieved over the past five years through the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2008-2012, which provided the strategic
framework for One United Nations support in the focus areas of governance, health,
HIV, nutrition and population, education, environment, and sustainable growth and
social protection. The United Nations supported policy advice and development,
capacity-building, evidence generation, innovations, and advocacy. Particular
attention was paid to advancing the rights of women, children, youth and the most
vulnerable. It also worked with decentralized institutions and implementing partners
to achieve downstream outcomes in some areas.
24. The United Nations contributed to the acceleration and deepening of
democratization by creating or reinforcing responsive governance institutions and
supporting the national parliament, the national Political Parties Forum, the National
Electoral Commission, and the media to broaden participation. Support for
decentralization contributed significantly to strengthening participatory governance
structures at the local level and to improving the quality of local service delivery.
25. The United Nations considerably enhanced access to justice by supporting
justice sector reforms and creating the sector-wide approach for justice. It provided
important support to the gacaca courts, which processed over 1.5 million cases
related to the 1994 genocide and provided valuable lessons for future transitional
justice programmes. Access to Justice Offices (Maison d’accès à la justice) were
established in all 30 districts.
26. Human rights were promoted through robust advocacy and support to the
Government for the ratification of human rights conventions and submission of
reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The United Nations Human Rights
Council’s Universal Periodic Review of Rwanda in February 2011 was facilitated,
thereby furthering the integration of human rights into the country’s development
frameworks.

7

27. The United Nations contributed measurably to the improving evidence-based
policy and decision-making processes by providing substantial technical and
financial assistance for producing disaggregated demographic and social statistical
data. 7 The process allowed for assessing governance areas, stimulating dialogue and
responsive actions by all governance stakeholders.
28. The United Nations contributed to the significant progress made in gender
empowerment through substantial support to the National Gender Machinery 8 and
through the mainstreaming of gender equality in the EDPRS I. It has become
mandatory for all ministries, provinces and districts in Rwanda to present gender
budget statements. A gender statistics framework was established to inform national
policy analysis and advocacy. The United Nations strengthened the One-Stop
Centres, which provided holistic services to 4,714 survivors of gender-based
violence (GBV), 49 per cent of whom were women, 46 per cent children and
5 per cent men. 9 The One Stop Centre model has culminated in Rwanda being
selected to host a regional centre of excellence in the area of GBV prevention and
response.
29. The United Nations was critical in improving Rwanda’s aid effectiveness and
enhancing development partnerships. It improved donor coordination mechanisms,
worked with the Aid Policy Manual of Procedures, established the Development
Assistance Database and implemented the Donor Performance Assessment
Framework.
30. The United Nations contributed to enhancing and implementing a multisectoral HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment approach to improve coordination and
research. Strategic plans were developed on HIV and elimination of mother-to-child
transmission, putting Rwanda on track to achieve universal access to HIV testing and
treatment, now at 95 per cent.
31. The United Nations supported the development of the health sector strategic
plans, the family planning policy, the adolescent sexual and reproductive health
policy, the youth policy, and the non-communicable diseases and injuries policy,
among others. It contributed to scaling up RapidSMS technology to reduce maternal
and child mortality by monitoring maternal and neonatal life cycles.
32. District health management systems were strengthened for effective delivery of
health services at decentralized levels. The United Nations supported the
implementation of the Joint Action Plan for the Elimination of Malnutrition , along
with district plans, which led to halving of the global acute malnutrition prevalence
rate to 3 per cent.

__________________

8

7

Including Enquête intégrale sur les conditions de vie des ménages (EICV, integrated household living
conditions survey), Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), Comprehensive Food Security and
Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA) and the population census.

8

The coordination mechanism comprised the Gender Monitoring Office, the Ministry of Gender and
Family Promotion and the National Women’s Council.

9

Evaluation report: Isange One Stop Centre (2012).

33. The United Nations assisted with the modelling and scaling up of the childfriendly school standards, which were adopted as the national quality guidelines for
school infrastructure and software inputs. It supported the Learning Achievement in
Rwandan Schools Assessment to improve the quality of education and to measure
learning outcomes in literacy and numeracy. The early childhood development policy
was developed, and the United Nations provided a daily meal to
350,000 schoolchildren to reduce drop-out rates and improve enrolment rates.
34. Technical support was provided to the Government to develop its
Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy and the Disaster Risk Reduction
Policy and Strategy, adopted by the Cabinet in 2012. Both strategies contribute to
reducing vulnerabilities and increasing climate resilience.
35. With the help of the United Nations, the Government developed a system of
food and nutrition security analysis that produces a twice-yearly report on the food
and nutrition security situation in the country and provides better early warning
information.
36. Technical support provided by the United Nations and other development
partners in 2009 enabled Rwanda to be the first country to align with the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, devising a compact
and developing an Agricultural Sector Investment Plan 2009–2012 10 (ASIP), which
resulted in receipt of a Global Agriculture and Food Security Program grant of
US$50 million. The coherence of the ASIP and sustained government investment in
the agriculture sector led to dramatic increases in production levels during the past
three years.
37. United Nations contributions through the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal
Resources have supported development of farmer skills and reduction of post-harvest
losses. Improved market information, technical capacity development and tools for
smallholder farmer cooperatives have increased sales of surplus production, resulting
in higher income for 25,000 farm families.
Common lessons learned
38. Two studies 11 reviewed progress and challenges in the implementation of the
UNDAF 2008-2012, underscoring Rwanda’s development performance and use of
international aid. The studies found that Delivering as One led to better alignment
with government plans and priorities and enhanced cooperation among agencies,
increasing efficiency. The United Nations had shown great promise in the early days
of the Delivering as One initiative, but had not kept up with the rapid changes in the
country.
39. The studies recommended that the United Nations strike a better balance
between inclusiveness and the need to focus and to avoid fragmentation.
Programmes should focus on piloting innovations that include M&E components that
document results, promote learning and allow for scaling up.
__________________
10 In

the framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme.

Country-led evaluation 2010; Paton, W. & Soriano, C. Comparative Advantage and Stakeholder
Analysis 2012.

11

9

40. It was further recommended that the United Nations focus on integrating best
practices and lessons learned elsewhere into national policies, strategies and
programmes by providing technical expertise and applied research; assisting with
policy development; and contributing to human resource development t o build better
institutions.
41. A major lesson learned from the UNDAF implementation was that the next
United Nations Development Assistance Plan (UNDAP) be more closely aligned
with the Government’s development strategy as outlined in the EDPRS II, beyond
the usual United Nations sectors.

III. Proposed programme
42. Rwanda was one of eight pilot countries for the Delivering as One initiative,
which aimed to improve the coherence, harmonization, efficiency, alignment and
effectiveness of the United Nations system’s work in Rwanda. To reinforce the
Delivering as One process, the Government of Rwanda and the United Nations
agreed to develop a unified UNDAP that would be fully aligned with the
Government’s EDPRS II.
43. In line with the issues identified in the situation analysis and with emerging and
ongoing national priorities, and drawing on lessons learned from the preceding
programming cycle, the UNDAP comprises three focus areas for United Nations
contributions to the national development agenda: (i) inclusive economic
transformation; (ii) accountable governance; and (iii) human development. 12 These
areas are in line with the priorities of EDPRS II: rapid economic growth; youth
productivity and employment; rural development; accountable governance; and
foundational issues. The three United Nations focus areas were determined through a
consultative process involving the Government, development partners and United
Nations agencies in Rwanda. In particular, the United Nations will contribute to
policy development, knowledge management and capacity development under the
EDPRS II priority areas.
Results Area 1: Inclusive economic transformation
44. The pillars of United Nations support for Rwanda’s economic transformation
agenda are pro-poor economic growth, social inclusion and pro-poor environmental
sustainability. This agenda aims to broaden the productive base of the economy,
expand job creation, raise productivity, improve competitiveness and promote the
greening of growth and consumption. The United Nations will assist the Government
to create a more educated and better-skilled workforce, to introduce new
technologies and innovation, and to expand trade with national, regional and global
markets. The United Nations will explore policy options for pro-poor green growth
to promote sustainable development.

__________________
These areas are congruent with the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011-2020 (2011) and the Rio+20 outcome document.

12

10

Outcome 1.1: Pro-poor growth and economic transformation are reinforced for
inclusive economic development.
45. The United Nations will strengthen capacities in relevant ministries and
improve national capacities to formulate and implement policies and strategies for
broadening economic and market opportunities, to promote regional integration and
international trade, notably within the East African Community. It will provide
demand-driven support for policy formulation and specialized expertise, promoting
South–South exchanges, providing direct support for increased capacity, and
facilitating learning and adoption of techniques and initiatives from across the region
and the continent.
46. The United Nations will promote strategies for pro-poor growth by supporting
enhanced policy research and analysis, M&E, communication and participation by
civil society. The United Nations will support government analytical work and policy
research on macroeconomic issues, furthering achievement of Vision 2020,
attainment of the remaining MDGs and progress toward the post-2015 agenda.
47. The United Nations will support the capacity of national and local institutions
to engage in cross-sectoral coordination of policy, results-based performance
management, research, and the generation and utilization of data that contributes to
evidence-based policy and programme formulation at all levels. It will provide
support for developing and managing a results-based M&E system for the EDPRS II.
48. The United Nations will provide financial and technical assistance for
implementing the Government’s Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy.
Exploiting green economic opportunities, particularly in natural resources
management, will reduce costs.
49. In line with the Busan Forum agenda, the United Nations will support the
country-level mutual accountability framework for development effectiveness by
working with development partners and promoting dialogue between the
Government and development partners. The aid information management system will
be further improved to enhance transparency, efficiency and coordination of aid.
Outcome 1.2: Rwandans benefit from skills development and decent employment
opportunities in both urban and rural areas, especially for youth and women.
50. The United Nations will support the development of an integrated national
employment programme and the reinforcement of national capacit y for
mainstreaming youth employment in national and sector policies. To address the
mismatch between youth skills and market demands and the needs of the rapidly
growing youth segment of the population, the emphasis will be on building youth
skills and competencies for employability, creating jobs, and developing small
enterprises. It will support the government employment-promotion programme that
coordinates policy and stimulates off-farm job growth, and will strengthen the
capacity of national business development institutions to provide market-driven
skills development and investment-promotion programmes.

11

51. To promote income-generating activities and employment creation, the United
Nations will facilitate access to finance for vulnerable groups of women and youth.
Limited utilization of financial services will be addressed through financial literacy
training and capacity-building for entrepreneurs. Cooperatives and individuals with
no banking services will be targeted to increase their access to education in financial
matters and entrepreneurship.
Outcome 1.3: Rwandans are able to link into and benefit from an improved
agriculture value chain and expanded access to international, regional and local
markets.
52. The United Nations will contribute to promoting equitable development
through capacity augmentation of smallholder farmer cooperatives by providing
technical training, follow-up coaching and infrastructure. It will support
development of staff capacity to provide outreach services, and establishment of a
warehouse receipt system, with the objective of enhancing access to local, regional
and international markets. Support will be provided to implementation of the
agricultural sector gender strategy in the framework of the Strategic Plan for the
Transformation of Agricultural in Rwanda.
53. The United Nations will help build institutional capacity of farmer
organizations to make them economically sustainable and develop their governance
management and capitalization structures so that banks are willing to provide
working capital and finance investments.
Outcome 1.4: Management for sustainable use of natural resources, energy and
the environment is improved, with increased use of clean renewable energy and
enhanced resilience to climate change.
54. Government capacity will be strengthened to implement a sector-wide policy
for natural resource management (particularly of land, water and minerals), climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction, the pillars of Rwanda’s Green Growth
and Climate Resilience Strategy. The Poverty-Environment Initiative will be scaled
up to strengthen linkages between poverty reduction programmes and environment
programmes. Support will be provided to enhance cross-sector policy coordination;
include pro-poor environmental sustainability in budget processes; and
operationalize FONERWA, the Environment and Climate Change Fund, which
finances natural resources and environmental management.
55. The United Nations will support the Government to address environmental
concerns and climate change adaptation in its programmes and plans, including
through increased production and use of renewable energy. Environmental and land
degradation will be addressed through agroforestry projects, land terracing,
flood-water capture and irrigation, which are effective long -term climate change
adaptation and disaster risk reduction strategies that particularly benefit the poorer,
most vulnerable segments of the society.
56. The United Nations will assist the Government to mainstream climate change,
environment and disaster risk issues in national and district development plans and
establish a national platform for disaster risk reduction in line with the Hyogo
Framework for Action and national policy. National disaster management institutions
will be strengthened in the areas of early warnin g systems, risk identification,
assessment and mapping.

12

Results Area 2: Accountable governance
57. The United Nations will work with the Government to promote and broaden
good governance processes. This will entail support for peacebuilding and
strengthening of democratic governance institutions to foster effective, accountable
and transparent government that promotes a peaceful, just and equitable society .
Emphasis will be placed on protection and promotion of human rights and
elimination of all forms of violence. The electoral cycle, the Justice, Reconciliation ,
Law and Order Sector reform process and the United Nations Human Rights Council
Universal Periodic Review are entry points for the United Nations to deepen
democracy, strengthen the rule of law and promote respect for human rights.
Outcome 2.1: Accountability and citizen participation in sustainable development
and decision-making processes at all levels are improved.
58. The United Nations will contribute to deepening democracy and good
governance, widening political space, and improving citizen participation and
accountability. Support will be provided for developing and strengthening
institutional frameworks and civil society organizations that promote inclusive,
equitable and community-driven participation in development processes. Emphasis
will be placed on strengthening the capacity of institutions such as the Rwanda
Governance Board to support democratic governance reforms in the legislative, civil
society and media sectors.
59. Building on the imihigo performance contracts 13 and measures to increase
accountability, the United Nations will support interventions to maximize
participation and inclusiveness in decision-making at all levels. Support will focus
on increasing citizen inputs and ownership in legislation and policy deliberation,
planning and budgeting.
60. The United Nations will strengthen the capacity of the National Electoral
Commission to perform its constitutional mandate of conducting and managing
elections; of political parties to engage in constructive dialogue and participate in
political processes; and of civil society and the media to help consolidate the gains
resulting from good governance.
61. Institutional and legislative frameworks will be enhanced to strengthen th e
watchdog role of the media and civil society in respect of national planning, budget
formulation and programme implementation.
Outcome 2.2: Human rights, justice and gender equality are promoted at all
levels.
62. The United Nations will support the promotion of the rule of law through
development of a comprehensive programme on access to justice for women,
children and other vulnerable groups. Initiatives will be anchored in the justice
sector plan and will respond to immediate needs, including through support to legal
aid provision and strengthening existing dispute resolution mechanisms such as the
__________________
Imigiho is a performance approach based on traditional culture. It is used to set local priorities and
annual targets and define strategies for achieving them.

13

13

Access to Justice Offices, abunzi mediation committees 14 and the courts. The United
Nations will complement the successful gacaca experience with support for the
special chamber created to try crimes against humanity.
63. The United Nations will provide policy advice and support to build the capacity
of national stakeholders to implement and monitor Rwanda’s international human
rights commitments, including the Universal Periodic Review, and other treaty body
reporting obligations. It will also support the empowerment of civil society in human
rights advocacy, specialized national institutions and grassroots initiatives. These
measures will pay specific attention to promoting the rights of children, women and
the most vulnerable.
64. The United Nations will support peace and reconciliation by strengthening
crime prevention and response capacities, particularly at the community level. The
United Nations will continue to promote peacebuilding, national unity and
reconciliation through community dialogue and knowledge products such as the
Rwanda Reconciliation Barometer.
65. The United Nations will strengthen the capacity of the national gender
machinery (NGM) to implement the Institutional Development Framework and the
strategic plan, and to establish a coordination mechanism. It will provide assistance
to develop and implement the Gender Management Information System.
Results Area 3: Human development
66. The United Nations will work with the Government to improve health,
nutritional status and learning outcomes (literacy, numeracy and life skills) for all
Rwandans, especially the most vulnerable, within the context of efforts to accelerate
human development. It will support the Government to expand social protection and
empower women and girls, in recognition of the importance of human development
in sustainable economic growth and transformation.
Outcome 3.1: All Rwandan children, youth and families, especially the most
vulnerable, have access to quality early childhood development, nutrition,
education and protection.
67. The United Nations will use a holistic approach based on multi-sectoral
strategies to sustainably improve the well-being and development of children and
families. Emphasis will be placed on designing strategies to reduce maternal and
child malnutrition and mortality; modelling and replicating integrated early
childhood development services; developing policy and curriculum and enhancing
education-sector capacities to deliver inclusive quality basic education, including
sexuality education; and developing robust alternative care and protection systems
for vulnerable women, children and youth.
68. The United Nations will conduct operational research and generate evidence in
the area of early childhood development, home -grown school-feeding, elimination of
chronic malnutrition and reproductive health. The interventions will include a robust

__________________
14

14

Like the gacaca, the abunzi are inspired by Rwandan traditional dispute resolution systems.

and rigorous M&E system that will build an evidence base for use by government
decision-makers in programme and policy design and formulation. It will provide
technical assistance to develop and scale up national programmes.
Outcome 3.2: All people in Rwanda have improved and equitable access to and
utilize high-quality promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative health
services.
69. The United Nations will support improved delivery of quality health, water and
sanitation services by strengthening national and sub -national capacities for health
governance, financing, policy development, service delivery, M&E, management of
medicine supplies and stocks, and health information systems. The United Nations
will help provide quality integrated services for health, sexual and reproductive
health, sexuality education and family planning. It will strengthen community
capacity to access quality health, water and sanitation services; achieve behavioural
change through the hygiene promotion programme; and improve water and sanitation
in communities, schools and health centres.
70. The United Nations will improve the quality of HIV prevention, treatment, care
and support, and reproductive health services among pregnant women, children,
youth and other groups. Interventions will be designed to improve emergency
obstetric care and reduce teenage pregnancies to decrease maternal mortality.
Outcome 3.3: Vulnerable group exposure to livelihood risk, inequalities and
extreme poverty is reduced.
71. The United Nations will support the Government to strengthen capacities of
national and sub-national institutions to collect and analyse data relating to food and
nutrition security and vulnerability, with the aim of improving targeting, delivery and
M&E of equitable and holistic social protection services. It will support scaling up of
the One Stop Centre approach for the prevention of and response to GBV and
violence against children.
72. The United Nations will support the social protection sector to develop an
integrated system. Social protection programmes will be modelled based on
livelihood analysis and participatory community-led planning and prioritization. The
models will have a robust M&E component that will feed back into programme and
policy formulation. Technical assistance will be provided to develop and scale up
national social protection programmes and to implement comprehensive childcare
system reform.
Outcome 3.4: Negative impact reduced and recovery improved for populations
affected by humanitarian crises.
73. The United Nations will help to develop national capacities for emergency
preparedness, contingency planning and response at all levels through research and
assessment, comprehensive risk assessment, and policy and strategy formulation. It
will support improved protection and self-reliance of refugees and other affected
populations, especially children, adolescents and women. The United Nations will
also support improved access to rights and to justice, health care and education for
refugees and vulnerable groups to promote their human potential.

15

IV. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
74. During the UNDAP 2013-2018 programme cycle, the United Nations will
enhance the programme management practices developed during the previous
UNDAF cycle. The Delivering as One governance structure, comprising the One
United Nations steering Committee, the United Nations country team, Development
results groups and the Programme Planning and Oversight Committee, will provide
continued leadership and oversight for implementation of the UNDAP and this
common country programme.
75. Risk management will be addressed through procedures contained in the
harmonized approach to cash transfers approach, including a macro assessment of
the public financial management system in Rwanda and micro assessments of
implementing partners. The preferred modality will be national implementation with
support services, with other modalities such as direct implementation used by
agreement with the Government.
76. The United Nations in Rwanda is committed to strengthening management for
results and will make greater use of evaluations to measure the impact of support
programmes. UNDAP outcomes will be monitored through joint review mechanisms,
including a comprehensive annual review process with the Government and
development partners. Development results groups will serve as the operational
mechanism for coordination, management, monitoring and reporting of results under
each outcome area using the DevInfo monitoring platform.
77. Mid-term and end-term evaluations of the UNDAP will be conducted to assess
the United Nations contributions to the EDPRS II and the achievement of the MDGs.
A detailed M&E plan is included in an annex to the UNDAP.
78. The United Nations will strengthen its capacity to deliver the common country
programme document, provide policy advice, participate actively in sector working
groups and develop joint flagship programmes in support of national priorities.
Agencies will ensure that their worldwide technical resources and comparative
advantages, including those of the Non-Resident Agencies, are used effectively to
strengthen capacities. To enhance delivery, strategic partnerships with bilateral and
multilateral development partners will be reinforced, as will those with nontraditional partners and private-sector institutions.
79. The resources in the results and resources frameworks in the annexes are part
of the UNDAP budget framework. Other resources will be sought as part of a joint
mobilization strategy centred on the UNDAP outcomes and outputs.

16

Annex
UNICEF results and resource framework for Rwanda, 2013-2018
Government/United Nations Development Assistance Plan (UNDAP) focus area 3. Human development
UNDAP outcome 3.1. All Rwandan children, youth and families, especially the most vulnerable, access quality early childhood development,
nutrition, education, protection and HIV prevention and treatment services
UNDAP outcome indicators. Percentage of children under five who are stunted; prevalence of HIV among youth aged 15-24 years; prevalence
of HIV among children aged 18 months; primary school completion rate; percentage of children meeting curriculum expectations at grade 3 level
for literacy and numeracy achievement; percentage of children from lowest poverty quintiles attending primary and secondary education
Partners

UNICEF contribution

Indicators

Baseline

Target

UNDAP outputs

Resources

Programme component result (PCR) 1. Health and nutritional status improved for all children, adolescents, youth and women,
including those infected or affected by HIV
Energy, Water
and Sanitation
Authority;
Rwanda
Biomedical
Center;
Ministry of
Infrastructure;
Ministry of
Health

Government capacity
improved to develop,
review and update
policies, strategies,
standards and protocols
for health, nutrition,
HIV/AIDS and water,
sanitation and hygiene
education (WASH)
programming

Number of child
survival and
development-related
policies,
strategies/protocols,
guidelines and
standards developed
or reviewed

15

24

Number of districts
with a minimum of 2
WASH infrastructure
models for children
with disabilities

0

12

Systems established, at
national and subnational
levels, to track and
monitor health, nutrition,
HIV/AIDS and WASH
services and outcomes
for mothers and children

Number of districts
using real-time data
monitoring systems
(RapidSMS) for
reporting on newborn
health outcomes

0

15

1.1 Improved capacity
of government
institutions and
communities to expand
equitable access to
quality integrated child
and family services
1.2 Multisectoral
strategies strengthened,
coordinated and
monitored to
sustainably reduce
child and maternal
malnutrition
2.1 Strengthened
capacity of national
health governance
institutions for
effective management
of finance, human
resources and service

Regular resources:
$5,400,000
Other resources
$10,660,000
Total:
$16,060,000

17

18

National and district
capacity strengthened to
coordinate, track and
monitor, by key sectors,
implementation of pronutrition evidence-based
interventions

Number of districts
with functional
multisectoral
nutrition planning
and coordination
structures

3

15

delivery
2.2 Strengthened
national and
subnational capacities
to provide quality
integrated health
services
2.5 Strengthened
community capacity at
all levels to demand
quality health services

PCR 3. Key learning outcomes (school readiness, literacy, numeracy and employability skills) improved for all children, focusing on
vulnerable children
Ministry of
Education;
Regional
Education
Bureau;
districts;
civil society
organizations

Expanded access to
learning opportunities
for most vulnerable
children

Percentage of
children with
disabilities enrolled
in primary-school
Number of districts
with a referral system
for children with
developmental delay
and disabilities

Quality and relevance of
education improved

75%

85%

0

30

Primary school
curriculum
incorporates ageappropriate HIV
prevention or
treatment
information

No

Yes

Learning
achievement
assessment
institutionalized

No

Yes

1.3 Strengthened
capacity of education
sector to deliver
inclusive quality basic
education

Regular resources:
$6,750,000
Other resources:
$22,500,000
Total:
$29,250,000

Expanded access to
quality integrated child
and family services

Percentage of
education budget
allocated for early
childhood
development (ECD)
and pre-primary

0.2%

3%

Number of ECD
models and preprimary model
schools piloting the
national ECD
standards

0

10

PCR 4. Evidence-informed child protection systems that protect children from violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect consistent with
national legal framework
Ministry of
Gender and
Family
Promotion;
Ministry of Local
Government;
National
Commission of
Children

Institutional framework
strengthened for
coordination and
management of child
protection services, and
services available

Decentralized
multisectoral child
protection services
available

Number of functional
coordination
structures using
harmonized child
protection
regulations

0

100

Percentage of sector
plans and budgets
integrating child
protection components
at all levels

TBD

Number of children
receiving child
protection services as
per established
standards

0

15,000

Number of model
ECD and family
centres providing
child protection
services

0

10

75%

1.4 Strengthened
alternative care and
protection systems for
vulnerable women,
children and youth
2.4 Increased access to
justice, especially for
women, children and
the most vulnerable
groups
3.1 Strengthened
capacity of national
and subnational
institutions to target
and deliver as well as
monitor and evaluate
equitable or holistic
social protection
services to vulnerable
groups
3.2 Strengthened
capacity of national

Regular resources:
$5,850,000
Other resources:
$10,050,000
Total:
$15,900,000

19

20

Human resources
capacity for child
protection systems
strengthened

Institutional capacity
strengthened for
evidence-based policy
formulation and
planning for child
protection systems

Number of
operational certified
community social
workers and
volunteers

0

3,500

Percentage of
training institutions
with child protection
standards integrated
in pre-service and inservice training
programmes

0

50%

Percentage of
national and district
plans based on
evidence from
operational research
on child protection
systems

0

50%

and subnational
institutions to increase
access to social
security services,
especially for youth
and women

Government/UNDAP focus area 3. Human development
UNDAP outcome 3.2. All people in Rwanda have improved and equitable access to high-quality promotional, preventive, curative and
rehabilitative health services and utilize these services
UNDAP outcome indicators. Infant and under-five mortality rate; maternal mortality ratio; HIV prevalence rate for the population; proportion of
the population accessing and using health services; percentage of the population satisfied with health services

PCR 2. Improved equitable access to and utilization of high-quality services for promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative
health, HIV/AIDS, WASH and nutrition for children adolescents, youth and women
Rwanda
Biomedical
Center;
Ministry of
Gender and
Family
Promotion;
Ministry of Local
Government;
Ministry of
Health;
districts

Reinforced equitable
access to quality health,
nutrition, HIV/AIDS and
WASH services for
children, adolescents,
youth and women

Neonatal mortality
rate (deaths per 1,000
live births)
disaggregated by
location,
geographical location
and wealth quintiles

29

20

Percentage of
districts with more
than 70% of
households with
potable drinking
water

55%

75%

Percentage of postnatal care visits
conducted within 2
days of birth for
mother and baby

50%

80%

Percentage (coverage
areas) of health
facilities with access
to safe water

74%

85%

Percentage of
communities with
adequate sanitation
facilities

57%

85%

1.5 Expanded quality
services for HIV
prevention, treatment,
care, support and
reproductive health
among pregnant
women, children,
youth and keypopulations
2.2 Strengthened
national and
subnational capacity to
provide quality
integrated health
services
2.4 Increased capacity
of national service
providers, civil society
and the private sector
to accelerate the
development and
implementation of
evidence-oriented
integrated HIV/AIDS
prevention, treatment
care and support
programmes for key
populations, including
increasing demand for

Regular resources:
$4,800,000
Other resources:
$21,500,000
Total:
$26,300,000

21

22

Number of ECD and
family sites
implementing child
survival and
development-related
interventions

0

10

95% of pregnant women
and 80% of HIVpositive children and
adolescents receive
quality prevention of
mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT)
of HIV services

Percentage of HIVinfected children
under 15 years
requiring and
receiving
antiretroviral therapy

54%

80%

Percentage of HIVpositive pregnant
women receiving
antiretroviral therapy
for PMTCT

68%

95%

80% of adolescents and
young people are
empowered with
comprehensive
knowledge and practice
protective behaviours

Percentage of
adolescents and
young people with
comprehensive
knowledge on HIV
prevention

87%

95%

HIV services
2.5 Strengthened
community capacity at
all levels to demand
quality health services

Government/UNDAP focus area 3. Human development
UNDAP outcome 3.3. Vulnerable groups have reduced exposure to livelihood risk, inequalities and extreme poverty
UNDAP outcome indicators. Number of eligible extreme poor benefitting from social protection programmes; percentage of poor exiting social
protection programmes; food consumption score for poor and most vulnerable groups; social security coverage
UNDAP outcome 3.4. Humanitarian response and disaster management: reduced negativ e impact and improved recovery and resilience of affected
populations as result of humanitarian crises
UNDAP outcome indicators. Percentage of affected households above the national poverty line

PCR 5. Social policies, strategies and social protection system improved to reduce poverty, vulnerability and inequality among children
and their families
Ministry of
Finance and
Economic
Planning;
Ministry of Local
Government;
Ministry of
Disaster
Management and
Refugee Affairs;
Ministry of
Health;
Ministry of
Education;
National Institute
of Statistics of
Rwanda;
Office of the
United Nations
High
Commissioner for
Refugees;
academic
research
institutions;

Capacity of national and
decentralized institutions
strengthened to target
and deliver equitable
and holistic childsensitive social
protection services

National information
management system
established for
targeting and
delivery

No

Functional ECD
public works
available

No

Yes

Annual sector budget
analysis available

No

Yes

Social protection
sectoral strategies are
HIV-sensitive and
inclusive

Percentage of sector
plans and strategies
with indicators on
HIV prevention

TBD

100%

Accountability
mechanisms
strengthened for
vulnerable and at-risk
populations to claim
their rights

Integrated social
protection
interventions
database available

No

Yes

0

4

Number of client
satisfaction survey
reports or evaluations

Yes

3.1 Strengthened
capacity of national and
subnational institutions
in targeting, delivery and
monitoring and
evaluation of equitable
and holistic social
protection services to
vulnerable groups
3.2 Strengthened
capacity of national and
subnational institutions
to increase access to
social security services,
especially for youth and
women

Regular resources:
$6,075,000
Other resources:
$6,350,000
Total:
$12,425,000

23

24

districts;
civil society
organizations

Evidence and research
on child-poverty and
disparities inform
national and subnational
policy formulation and
implementation

Percentage of key
social protection
sector personnel
trained in data
collection and
analysis

10%

100%

Number of research
and dialogue centres
of excellence
established

0

4

National and subnational
policies and strategies
on disaster management,
preparedness and
response are childfocused

National
preparedness and
response strategy
includes child-related
data

No

Yes

4.1 Strengthened
national capacity at all
levels for humanitarian
and emergency
preparedness and
response

All children and women
in disaster situations and
refugees have access to
key interventions as per
UNICEF Core
Commitments for
Children in
Humanitarian Action

Percentage of
children and women
receiving
humanitarian
response within the
first 72 hours

TBD

100%

4.2 Improved
protection and selfreliance of refugees
and other affected
populations, especially
children, adolescents
and women

United Nations
Coordinated Rapid
Assessment
conducted within 48
hours

No

Yes

Quantity of
emergency supplies
pre-positioned

TBD

As per
target
population

Regular resources:
$12,375,000

Cross-sectoral support

Other resources:
$7,940,000
Total:
$20,315,000
Regular resources:
$41,250,000

Total UNICEF indicative resources

Other resources:
$79,000,000
Total:
$120,250,000

_____

25

