Sao Tome and Principe
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Sao Tome and
Principe (E/ICEF/2011/P/L.27) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (2023 June 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data †
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (under 18 years)

0.1

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

78

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2008-2009)

13

(%, urban/rural)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live birth, 1994-2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)

12/14
150
95/97

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2007)

74

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

89

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

26

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

..

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)

8

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2006)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

69
70/68, 70/67, 63/78
1 140

One-year-old immunized with DPT3 (%)

98

One-year-old immunized against measles (%)

90

†

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org/ .

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Sao Tome and Principe is a small island nation located in the Gulf of Guinea,
with a population of 163,784 (2010 estimate). The country ranks among the group
of least developed countries.
2.
Over 53 per cent of the population is poor, according to the Poverty Profile
Study (2001), and the poverty is more pronounced among female -headed
households (56 per cent).The highest levels of poverty are found in the Northern
region (71 per cent) followed by the Southern region (65 per cent) and the
Autonomous Region of Principe (60 per cent). The mechanisms of social protection
are inefficient and do not cover the needs of the most deprived populations, namely
children belonging to the poorer quintiles, mothers with little or low levels of
education, single-female-headed households, mainly in the districts of Caué,
Cantagalo, Lembá and Príncipe.
3.
Sao Tome and Principe endorsed the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in
2006, though little has yet been done. An aid coordination unit has been operational
since 2010; however, weak coordination has been a significant bottleneck, mainly in
the health sector. Santomean civil society is still relatively young and with limited
capacity, but is active in the areas of health, water and sanitation, education and
protection of children, especially in the most remote rural areas where radio and
television broadcasts are not available.
4.
Infant mortality and under-five child mortality rates have decreased, from 71 per
1,000 live births and 111 per 1,000 live births, respectively, in 2001 to 38 per 1,000
live births and 63 per 1,000 live births, respectively, in 2009. Neonatal mortality rates

2

are higher in the Centre region (26 per 1,000 live births) and in the North region
(19 per 1,000 live births). The child mortality risks are three times higher for children
living in families of the poorest quintile than for those living in families of the
wealthiest quintile.
5.
The maternal mortality rate remains high (150 per 100,000 live births in 2009)
despite some progress. The major causes are the poor quality of services, poor
quality of equipment, inefficient service organization standards, early pregnancies
and ignorance by future mothers of the signs of a high -risk delivery.
6.
Overall, the HIV prevalence rate is 1.5 per cent. Among youth aged 15-19 years,
it is estimated to be 0.6 per cent among girls and 0.8 per cent among boys. The rural
areas are more affected than urban centres (2.2 per cent and 0.8 per cent respectively).
Prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) services have been provided in
32 out of 37 health centres. However, disparities in antiretroviral (ARV) drug
coverage and antenatal care are visible; only eight health centres placed in urban areas
provide ARV treatment and few doctors have sufficient skills to administer ARV
treatment.
7.
Birth registration rates have increased, from 69 per cent in 2006 to 75 per cent in
2009, as result of a successful intersectoral programme between the Ministries of
Justice and Health, jointly supported by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and UNICEF. There are some emerging and increasing phenomena in child
protection, such as child labour and children begging in the streets. In 19 per cent of
families, at least one member was victim of sexual violence; victims are
predominantly (97 per cent) female. Sexual abuse of minors is greater in the Central
region, especially in Agua Grande and Mé-Zochi, the most densely populated districts.
8.
The net enrolment in primary school (through 6th grade) was 89 per cent in 2009
(87.5 per cent for boys and 90.2 per cent for girls). Quality of education remains an
issue, with high drop-out rates (12.6 per cent) and repetition rates (15.4 per cent). The
access to the second level of basic education (grades 5 and 6) is still limited because
schools offering it are located mainly in the district capitals; regional differences in
access are pronounced (from 40 per cent in Agua Grande to 10 per cent in Lobata).
Despite its recognized importance in the preparation for school education, pre-school
education is not mandatory or free, and there is no early childhood development
policy. Enrolment is at 52 per cent of children aged 3-5 years, with no significant
gender disparities.
9.
Access to drinking water and basic sanitation varies according to the wealth
quintile. The access to improved drinking water is estimated at 95 per cent for the
wealthiest quintile, against 79 per cent for the poorest. The inequity in basic
sanitation is even greater: 33 per cent of the population in wealthiest quintile have
access to improved sanitation facilities, compared to 8 per cent in the poorest.

Key results and lessons learned from previous programme of
cooperation, 2007-2011
Key results achieved
10. Advocacy and social policies. With UNICEF technical assistance, the first and
second monitoring reports on the Convention on the Rights of the Child were
produced and sent to the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The report on
A World Fit for Children was released in 2007. The review of the national penal

3

code was a major step in the harmonization of national laws with the key
international conventions.
11. Communication, partnerships and resource mobilization. Two community
radio stations were established, in partnership with UNESCO and the organization
International Alert, to increase access to information for the more deprived. A
national campaign on hand washing with soap for diarrhoea prevention was
developed in close collaboration with the Department of Water, the national Red
Cross, the African Development Bank and the Alisei organization, reaching more
than 85 per cent of children and their families. A campaign on avian influenza
prevention was undertaken nationwide in collaboration with the Ministries o f Health
and Agriculture, the World Health Organization (WHO) and non -governmental
organization (NGO) partners. The campaign results were impressive, as only three
children were affected by the epidemic.
12. Child survival and development. UNICEF support, mainly in vaccination and
nutrition, has contributed to reductions in child and maternal mortality. The
immunization programme covers more than 80 per cent of the target groups in all
districts. Other encouraging results achieved in 2008 are increased ant enatal care
(98 per cent) and an increase in the assistance of skilled attendants at delivery
(82 per cent), both in collaboration with WHO, the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and NGOs. The improvement of PMTCT services, including ARV
treatment, in collaboration with Brazilian Government, has ensured universal access
for pregnant HIV-positive women and children.
13. Basic education. The child-friendly schools initiative has contributed, in
collaboration with the World Food Programme, to an improve ment of pedagogical
conditions and in the school environments, including increased access to piped
water and improved hygiene and basic sanitation. The Government, in partnership
with UNICEF, worked with seven non-formal education centres, NGOs and
religious groups to disseminate the Sara Communication Initiative, 1 which
contributed to training of about 45 per cent of girls from rural areas on life skills.
The country programme also supported the production and dissemination of
statistical information on the education system.
14. Water, sanitation and hygiene. A WASH information management system is
being installed in all districts under the leadership of the Ministry of Natural
Resources. More than 780 family latrines were constructed, in collaboration wit h
UNDP, the African Development Bank and NGOs, benefiting more 30.000 children
and their respective families.
15. Child protection. Child birth registration in all maternity centres was
institutionalized in January 2010, in close collaboration between the Ministry of
Health and the Ministry of Justice and UNDP, reaching over 90 per cent of
newborns. The institutional framework for the protection of the rights of children
and women has been enhanced by a growing level of collaboration and the increased
number of institutions concerned about those issues. The country programme
__________________
1

4

The Sara Communication Initiative was developed, with UNICEF assistance, in 10 countries of
Eastern and Southern Africa. The dramatized radio series revolving around Sara and her friends
communicates to adolescent girls and their parents a number of important messages on early
marriage, female genital cutting, sexual harassment, HIV/AIDS and girls’ domestic workload
and the importance of staying in school.

contributed to the production and dissemination of data on child protection through
studies on child labour, early pregnancies and paternity, on sexual abuse and
exploitation of minors and on the evaluation of sexual and reproductive health
structures for adolescents and young people.
Key lessons learned
16. In view of the frequent changes of Government, the implementation of the
country programme was carried out in partnership with civil society institutions.
17. The South-South Initiative, known as Laços Sul-Sul, provided Sao Tome and
Principe with an excellent opportunity to outline and share information on key
developments and constraints tied to PMTCT programme, in particular the need for
improved networking, greater technical human resources and better sharing of
partners’ best practices.

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Advocacy, social policies and partnerships
Capacity development for child survival,
development and protection
Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

525

625

1 150

2 231

1 875

4 106

994

—

994

3 750

2 500

6 250

Preparation process
18. The preparation process of the new cycle began with the Common Country
Assessment undertaken by the United Nations agencies in collaboration with the
Government and partners. A strategic planning retreat was held with the
Government, bilateral partners and NGOs to identify areas of comparative
advantage of the United Nations system agencies. UNICEF and its partners, under
the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and International Cooperation, held a
series of consultations to identify the main challenges facing children and the main
strategies for the 2012-2016 cycle. The final outcome was the UNDAF. This
strategic analysis allowed for a deeper understanding of the development situation
and the main challenges facing the country and, consequently, the identificat ion of
the main priorities and areas of cooperation within the new cycle: (a) governance
and gender equality; (b) sustainable economic growth, poverty eradication and
nutritional security; (c) access to basic social services; (d) environmental
conservation; and (e) disaster, water and sanitation management.
Programme and component results and strategies
19. The overall aim of the country programme is to contribute to the achievement
of Millennium Development Goals, particularly by reducing the vulnerabi lity and
inequities of deprived children and women while ensuring their rights to survival,

5

development, protection and participation. The small size of the country allows for
taking all interventions to scale. Communication for development and monitoring
and evaluation will be cross-cutting for all programmes components.
20. The advocacy, social policies and partnerships programme component will
help set up, by the end of 2016, a social protection system with adequate financial
resources for the most disadvantaged and strengthen institutional and civil society
capacities.
21. The programme component on capacity development for child survival,
development and protection will help ensure that, by the end of 2016, access to and
quality of basic social services (health, nutrition, education and care for HIV/AIDS),
especially for the most vulnerable, have increased and that the legal framework for
the protection of the most vulnerable children has been strengthened.
22. Within the overall the focus on equity and the framework of reducing
disparities, the country programme will concentrate on the most deprived children
and will take advantage of strong government commitment to the social sectors to
accelerate social policy and legal reforms. Key strategies include equity-focused
advocacy for (a) a comprehensive and sustainable social protection policy; (b) the
improvement of service delivery in order to reduce child and maternal mortality;
(c) the development of a national policy on water and sanitation to ensure that all
schools are compliant with the water, sanitation and hygiene strategy; (d) the
development of integrated services to respond to violence, abuse and exploitation of
the most vulnerable children and women.
23. Other strategies include (a) making basic education and pre-school education
universal; (b) improving the quality of education, with particular emphasis on
equity, participation and accountability of all stakeholders; (c) supporting training in
the preparation of emergency plans in education; (d) broadening partnerships with
civil society organizations, United Nations agencies and the mass media and
establishing new alliances with Parliament, the private sector and district councils;
(e) expanding South-South cooperation (Brazil, Nigeria and South Africa),
especially the sharing of experiences.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
24. The country programme will contribute to the implementation of national
priorities, as defined in the National Poverty Reduction Strategy, the Na tional
Strategy for Gender Equality and Equity and the National Strategy for Education, to
reach the Millennium Development Goals. The UNDAF outcomes, mainly those
related to the basic social services, constitute the basis for this country programme.
Relationship to international priorities
25. The programme will continue to strengthen national capacities for the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. It will al so contribute to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and those of A World Fit for
Children, protecting children against abuse, exploitation, violence, negligence, in
short, promoting a favourable environment for girls and boys, in particula r for the
most vulnerable living in precarious situations.

6

Programme components
26. Advocacy, social policies and partnerships. This programme component will
support the Government in the following areas: (a) integration of the specific needs
of vulnerable children (girls and boys) and women in planning processes at national
and sectoral levels; (b) production and utilization of disaggregated data, through
thematic studies and surveys, on the situation of boys, girls and women, focusing on
the most vulnerable groups; (c) drafting and implementation of a national social
protection plan; (d) development of social protection tools, with a range of
protective and capacity enhancement mechanisms, to help overcome child poverty
and vulnerability; (e) legislative reform to harmonize national legislation with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women; and (f) expansion of partnerships with
local authorities, religious institutions, bilateral partners, NGOs and the private
sector.
27. Capacity development for child survival, development and protection. This
component will achieve the following child survival results: (a) ensure that all
children under the age of one are fully immunized; (b) focus on the quintiles with
the least coverage, improve access to services; (c) support the Government in the
reduction of neonatal, infant and maternal mortality, in particular in the most
deprived districts, with improved postnatal care and impro vement in the quality of
delivery in all maternity centres; (d) monitor the main causes of maternal mortality
and develop support for implementation of a maternal mortality audit policy, in
close collaboration with WHO and UNFPA; (e) increase effects to reduce cases of
severe acute malnutrition and to increase exclusive breastfeeding; (f) with regard to
malaria, focus on promoting the use of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets in
the most deprived quintiles; (g) with regard to HIV/AIDS, focus activiti es on girls
and boys, in urban and rural areas, as well as the most marginalized groups, to
increase their knowledge in terms of prevention and protection.
28. Concerning education, the component will support the Ministry of Education
in efforts to achieve universal access, to improve the quality of basic education and
to increase the number of child-friendly schools. It will ensure that at least 50 per
cent of children have access to pre-school education. Attention will be given to
children with special needs, in particular those in the most vulnerable areas. The
improvement in school hygiene, water and sanitation conditions, and taking into
account gender specificities, will constitute one of the priorities in facilitating a
healthy school environment. An education plan on emergencies will be designed and
adopted. Teacher’s training will be introduced.
29. Concerning child protection, the component will support the Government in
continuing its legislative reform efforts, harmonizing national legislation wi th the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, thereby promoting the creation of a more protective
environment for children and women. It will advocate the availability and use of
integrated services in response to violence, abuse and exploitation of the most
vulnerable children and women.
30. Key strategies will include strengthening capacities, providing support to civil
society in communication for development activities, and, in partn ership with NGOs
and communities, encouraging behavioural change in favour of more protective
social practices and norms.

7

31. Cross-sectoral costs will cover the expenses of management activities and
programmes support, including planning and coordination, personnel and operation
costs, including logistics, administration, finance and the security of UNICEF staff,
as well as the implementation costs that are not allocated individually to
programmes.
Major partnerships
32. Each component will strengthen the existing partnerships with key government
sectors, United Nations agencies, including non-resident agencies. Emphasis will be
given to the development of innovative partnerships with bilateral donors and
alliances with district councils. Particular attention will be given to partnerships
with civil society organizations on issues regarding maternal and child health,
popularization of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, early pregnancy and promotion of good hygiene practic es among school
children and those out of school.
33. Collaboration with bilateral partners will be reinforced, to establish alliances
supporting efforts in the survival, protection, participation and education of
children. Special attention will be given to the collaboration with the embassies of
Angola, Nigeria, Portugal and South Africa on health and protection areas. The
South-South collaboration with Brazil will continue, specifically in PMTCT and
HIV prevention in schools.
34. Partnerships with the private sector will also be developed, to mobilize
resources for communication for development strategies, in particular for the most
vulnerable communities and groups.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
35. The programme will be coordinated by a team of designated focal points from
different government institutions. The team will be led by the Directorate of
Cooperation within the Ministry of Finance and Cooperation as well as by UNICEF.
The capacity of the group in monitoring and evaluation will be strengthened through
training, technical assistance and exchange of monitoring tools.
36. The country programme will be monitored and evaluated through (a) a five year integrated monitoring and evaluation plan; (b) field visits and community
consultations by the Government and UNICEF; (c) programme-specific evaluation
and impact studies; (d) bi-annual evaluations, (e) the midterm review in 2014; and
(f) the final review of the UNDAF cycle in 2015.
37. National data collection will be monitored through STPInfo (the national
DevInfo database), the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 4 and sectoral surveys, as
well as data research and analysis, reports generated by partners, and evaluation of
the social protection policy.

8

