Senegal
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Senegal
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.28) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data † (2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

6.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

93

Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(% urban/rural, poorer/richer)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 1999-2005)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2005)

14
7/17, 21/5
410 a
58/59 b

Primary schoolchildren reaching grade 5 (%, 2007)

58

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

69

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

51

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

0.9

Child work (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)

22

Registration of births (%, under 5 years old, 2005)

55

(% male/female, urban/rural, poorer/richer)
GNI per capita (US$)

56/54, 75/44, 31/81
1 040

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

86

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

79

†
a

b

Additional data on women and children are available on the website www.childinfo.org.
The figure of 410 deaths per 100,000 live births is an estimate adjusted for 2008 by the
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and World
Bank, along with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. More data are available on the website
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
Survey data.

Situation of children and women
1.
Over the last ten years, Senegal, 49 per cent of whose 13.7 million inhabitants
are under 18 years of age, has endeavoured to build a nation based on respect for
human rights and free enterprise. Since 2008, progress in this endeavour has been
serious impeded by crises in the economic, energy and financial sectors, which,
compounded by droughts and flooding, have slowed growth, disrupted governance
and held back human development. The record of implementation of the poverty
reduction strategy shows that the programmes for the period 2006-2010 had an
uneven social impact and that poverty not only continued to blight 51 per cent of the
population but became even more pronounced among the poorest members of
society. Projections indicate that no significant improvement may be expected in the
situation because economic growth will not exceed 4 per cent, a rate too low to
bring about any sustainable reduction in the disparities among social groups or to
attain all the Millennium Development Goals. Over the next few years the disparity
between poor and less poor, and between Dakar and the rural areas, will persist and
will impede efforts to reduce chronic poverty and its transmission from generation
to generation. The most critical situation will be faced by some 1.5 million children
living in the poorest rural areas in the regions of Tambacounda, Kédougou, Kolda,
Matam, Fatick and Sédhiou and certain suburbs of Dakar.

2

2.
Infant and child mortality rates have continued their downward trend since
2005, dropping from 64 to 33 deaths per 1,000 live births for in fant mortality and
from 121 to 85 deaths per 1,000 live births for child mortality. HIV/AIDS
prevalence among children remains low, as only 0.7 per cent of adults are HIV
positive. There are 17,810 HIV/AIDS orphans in Senegal. The incidence of child
disease is highest in rural areas that lack basic health services, have poor health
care, where secondary services are little used, access to sanitation is lacking and
inappropriate family practices persist. The prevalence of low weight children
(17 per cent) is high throughout the country, but critical in the southern regions
(32 per cent in Kolda, 25 per cent in Tambacounda). The percentage of the
population with access to safe drinking water is as high as 93 per cent in urban areas
and 57 per cent in rural areas. For sanitation the proportion is estimated at 90 per
cent for urban areas and 46 per cent for rural areas. In poor areas a child is 2.5 times
more likely to die than a child in a rich household. The maternal mortality rate,
which had dropped from 510 per 100,000 births in 1992 to 401 in 2005, has only
decreased slightly over the past five years because the total fertility rate remains
high, at 5.3 births per woman, and because the rate of attended births is no higher
than 52 per cent. In poor areas, because of deep-rooted traditions and lack of care,
women routinely give birth at home. A review of public spending in the sector
shows that the portion of gross domestic product dedicated to health care has never
been higher than 4 per cent and that spending has been inefficient and focused on
the richer regions.
3.
In the field of primary education, the overall school enrolment rate has risen to
92.5 per cent, evenly balanced between boys and girls. An analysis of public
spending shows that the growth in school attendance has helped bridge gaps in
access to education, but has not eliminated the barriers that block access to
education for children from poor families (inefficient spending, school fees). The
net school attendance rate is no higher than 75 higher and the school completion rate
has remained under 60 per cent for several years. Rates are lower in rural areas
because of inadequate school facilities, the poorer quality of teaching and the
poverty of families. Over 32 per cent of rural schools are un able to provide a
complete elementary school cycle, as compared to 7 per cent in urban areas, and
nearly 48 per cent of rural schools have no latrines, as compared to 15 per cent in
urban areas. Other factors, such as the inadequate qualification of teache rs, the low
level of birth registration, the delayed development of preschool education, school
violence, poor school governance and the persistence of invisible school fees limit
access and militate against attendance, thereby contributing to the exclusio n of
disabled and poor children.
4.
Senegal has more or less brought its national legislative framework into line
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, but the benefits for children in
terms of protection are mixed. The practice of female circumc ision has declined and
is expected to disappear altogether by 2015. Early marriage and the abuse and
exploitation of children remain worryingly widespread, however, and their
occurrence is even increasing. Nearly 500,000 children live apart from their pare nts,
many of them on the street and labouring or engaged in begging. Many cases of
trafficked children have been brought to light, in particular involving children from
poor regions and neighbouring countries. Girls are especially vulnerable to labour
exploitation and sexual abuse. This is attributable to the gradual disappearance of

3

family and community protection systems, urban growth, poverty and lack of access
to education.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation
(2007-2011)
Key results
5.
The country programme has lent vigour to activities in support of child
survival by enabling national partners more effectively to target vulnerable children
by successfully scaling up activities in 55 of the 67 districts, and by giving prio rity
to community-based efforts to combat diarrhoea, acute respiratory infections,
malnutrition and preventable diseases through vaccination. In times of fiscal
restraint, this support has also helped to maintain immunization and vitamin A
coverage levels at above 80 per cent and to broaden the campaign against severe
acute malnutrition in areas at risk of food insecurity, which contributed to the
lowering of maternal, infant and child mortality rates observed in 2009. The
International Health Partnership and the Harmonization for Health in Africa
initiative have been strengthened around these positive developments.
6.
Following the implementation in 400 primary schools located in the
Tambacounda and Kolda regions, considered two of the poorest in the countr y, of a
package of services including improved learning conditions and the introduction of
preschool classes, enrolment rates have risen, gender disparities have been narrowed
and dropout rates reduced. These results have helped boost the national averages
and thus accelerate progress towards attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals. They have been used in a campaign to replicate this improved learning
environment in all schools.
7.
Through such measures as the mapping and analysis of protection syste ms,
minimum quality standards for child care services, the database on vulnerable
children, the national action plan against trafficking in women and children and the
creation of coordination and planning frameworks in 18 prefectures it has been
possible to create a network of more than 100 child protection service providers and
to lay the groundwork for protection services that are more responsive to the needs
of vulnerable children. Where the practice of female circumcision is concerned, the
number of villages which have abandoned this practice has grown from 1,495 to
4,625 and the target of 5,000 is on track for 2015.
8.
The need to provide accurate data on poverty, the vulnerability of children and
the impact of crises has necessitated an increase in the number of social policies and
programmes for the most vulnerable, and the more careful targeting of such policies
and programmes. Studies on local arrangements within the communities for the
protection of children have helped make this undertaking a natio nal priority,
resulting in the launch of several wide-reaching projects for the benefit of children
particularly affected by the economic crises and humanitarian disasters linked to
climate change.
Lessons learned
9.
The introduction of the community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach has
shown that it is entirely feasible to scale up activities when there is evidence of low

4

cost and good community participation. This boosts ownership by the Government
and donors and, working in combination, these factors have led to a rapid expansion
of high-impact activities to promote child survival.
10. The decentralized approach adopted by the 2007-2011 programme has helped
improve the indicators at the national and regional levels but its impact has been
insufficient to reduce the disparities between districts within a given region and
between poor and non poor in the same district. To ensure greater equity in access to
social services, a stronger focus should be placed on district -level interventions and
this approach should be reinforced with arrangements to facilitate access by the poor
to these services, such as the removal of financial barriers and the organization of
community activities. These interventions are more responsive to local conditions
and ensure the wider participation of communities and children. They are more
readily supported by policymakers, communities and development partners as
potential solutions to problems relating to equity.
11. National level efforts to scale up activities, including vaccination, and to
heighten their impact have been undermined by the lack of continuity in national
governance and the weakness of local health services. Consequently, cases of polio
and measles have re-emerged. More investments are needed to improve local
governance and to strengthen services, thereby reducing the disparities between
national and local levels.
12. The evidence attesting to the situation of vulnerable children and victims of
child abuse and neglect, and the use of this evidence in advocac y and negotiations
with the Government and development partners, have made it possible to give
priority once again to the need to ensure that the country has at its disposal a
protection system built around a minimum package of services for vulnerable
families, including a strong prevention component. Heightened community outreach
and improved communication for development are needed to combat harmful social
behaviour and unacceptable standards and to achieve sustainable progress.

Programme of work, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Survival of women and children

7 500

20 000

27 500

Inclusive and quality education

3 500

12 000

15 500

Child protection

5 000

14 000

19 000

Social policies and advocacy

5 000

2 000

7 000

Cross-sectoral costs

5 730

2 000

7 730

26 730

50 000

76 730

Total

Preparation process
13. The preparation of the country programme was facilitated by updating the
analysis of the situation of children and women and evaluating the poverty reduction

5

strategy, the 2010 national report on the Millennium Development Goals and the
2011-2015 national economic and social policy document. The analysis and
programmatic priorities set out in these texts were supplemented by the
recommendations of the joint midterm United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) in 2009, the 2005 recommendations of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child, a mapping of vulnerable areas, a comparative anal ysis of
development agencies and discussions with government partners, civil society and
development partners. The resulting document is aligned with national pri orities and
those of UNDAF 2012-2016.
Programme and outcomes of components and strategies
14. The purpose of the country programme is to help Senegal speed up the
realization of children’s rights and attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals in an equitable manner in the priority areas of child survival, education and
protection.
15. At the national level, strategies based on building knowledge, advocacy based
on real evidence and strengthened partnerships will support the development of
more coherent social policies and more effective budgeting processes, thereby
reducing geographical and social disparities and keeping the issue of child poverty
high on the political agenda. At the sectoral level, greater reliance on capacity
building and on human rights and equity based approaches will help ensure that the
processes of analysis, planning and budgetary allocations are better adapted to
poverty reduction efforts. At the community level, the programme will support the
establishment of comprehensive, low-cost child survival, birth registration,
sanitation, social protection and parental education services.
16. By analysing social and geographical disparities it has been possible to
identify the country’s most vulnerable departments, where access to social services
must be improved. In these departments, the programme will ensure that 50 per ce nt
of all children in the poorest quintile receive quality care in which health, health,
education and protection services are combined in a synergetic manner. This will
facilitate the establishment of holistic protection services that both ensure
prevention and foster the reintegration of socially excluded children. The
improvement of local governance, coordination at regional and local levels,
community outreach and communication for development will ensure that
interventions are both effective and sustainable. Particular attention will be given to
children separated from their parents and to children in Ziguinchor and Sédhiou
exposed to the risks of landmines and susceptible to the stress of the persisting
insecurity situation.
17. In view of the recurrence of natural disasters, the country programme, working
together with United Nations agencies, will help build the capacity for emergency
preparedness and response at sectoral, regional and department levels in areas
relating to water, education and protection. The risks associated with natural
disasters and political and social situations will be updated annually, leading to
possible changes in strategies.
Links with national priorities and UNDAF
18. The 2011-2015 national economic and social policy document aims to ensure
economic growth and inclusive social protection, with a view to attaining the

6

Millennium Development Goals. The outcomes and impacts of UNDAF 2012-2016
revolve around these priorities. The Senegal-UNICEF cooperation programme will
help operationalize these various objectives, outcomes and impacts.
19. The country programme will be anchored around the following UNDAF
outcomes:
(a) Mothers and children, in particular the most vulnerable, will benefit from
a package of quality health interventions;
(b) Children and adolescents, in particular the most vulnerable, will enjoy
good quality basic education and training;
(c)
system;

Vulnerable groups will benefit from an adequate social protection

(d) Vulnerable groups will receive adequate protection against violence,
abuse and exploitation;
(e) National institutions (at central, regional and local levels) will ensure the
acceleration of efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in a
participatory, transparent and equitable manner.
Links with international priorities
20. The programme will contribute to efforts undertaken by Senegal to comply
with the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It will also
contribute to fulfilment of the UNFICEF medium-term strategic plan and
compliance with the recommendations of the forums on education for all and the
United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative, the recommendations of the International
Health Partnership and the Harmonization for Health in Africa initiative and the
recommendations of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly of
September 2010 on the Millennium Development Goals. The programme will also
contribute to the implementation of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and
the third High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness.
Programme elements
21. Child survival and survival of women. The child survival component will
contribute to implementation of the 2008-2015 national child survival plan and the
2009-2018 national health development plan, with a focus on replication at the
national level of the accelerated child survival and child development strategy, with
a view to attaining goals 4 and 5 of the Millennium Development Goals. The
expected key outcome of this component is that, by 2016, at least 80 per cent of
mothers and children will be benefiting from the integrated package of quality
interventions for maternal, newborn and child health.
22. To achieve these results it will be necessary to ensure high coverage of
effective health interventions and to secure funding that is both adequate and readily
available. To this end, the country programme will help build national capacity to
implement the recommendations of the public expenditure review calling for the
improved planning, costing and prioritization of child -oriented activities in the
midterm expenditure framework; accordingly, priority will be given to primary
health care for children. The programme will promote efforts to review the

7

modalities for community involvement in health care costs, with a view to removing
barriers to essential health care for the poor. Working together with partners in the
International Health Partnership and the Harmonization for Health in Africa
initiative, the programme will provide technical and logistical support to revitalize,
on a nationwide scale, the benefits of the expanded programme on immunization
and to ensure the wide replication of scaled up, community-oriented activities.
Emphasis will be placed on the prevention among children of malaria, diarrhoea,
acute respiratory infections, malnutrition and HIV/AIDS and on care for children
with those conditions, following innovative approaches and promoting sustainable
behaviour change.
23. The programme will support better targeted interventions benefiting the more
vulnerable and designed to improve the availability and use of essential health
services in areas of high infant, child and maternal mortality in the more
disadvantaged regions of Kolda, Sédhiou and Kédougou. It will also help partners to
implement district-level plans which combine community activities, services at
clinics and health centres, efficient monitoring systems, and changes in behaviour
conducive to the prevention and treatment of children’s diseases. These services will
provide a continuum of care, including efforts to control common children ’s
diseases, to prevent mother to child transmission of HIV/AIDS, the provision of
HIV-related paediatric care, the promotion of good practices, community sanitation
and efforts to combat malnutrition in infants and young children. A certain
geographical flexibility will be exercised in implementing the nutrition sub
component, to ensure an appropriate response to any changes that may affect
Senegal.
24. Inclusive and quality education. Senegal has made enormous strides in the
education of boys and girls but is still facing problems with school attendance rates
and in reducing disparities in access between the co untry’s departments and the
social groups within these departments. The programme will help partners meet
these challenges and aims to achieve the following result: by 2016, at least 80 per
cent of school-age children, in particular the most vulnerable, will have access to
good quality basic education and will complete primary school.
25. Working together with its partners, the programme will help the Ministry of
Education remove barriers hindering children’s access to quality education by
analysing the nature and extent of these barriers and by carrying out advocacy work
with a view to their removal. It will facilitate implementation of the
recommendations of the education expenditure review by remapping the school
districts and revamping the information system, using these processes as tools to
combat social exclusion.
26. To facilitate the return to school of children who have dropped out or who live
on the margins of society, the programme will support the development and testing
of innovative bridges between formal and informal education systems. To improve
the quality of education and school performance, the country programme will
support the revision of the national human resource development plan, will join the
debate on local languages and will launch a plan to scale up the child-friendly
schools project, which will also cover preschool classes. A national plan will be set
in place to suppress school violence, and in particular violence against girls.
27. In the regions of Kolda, Sédhiou, Kédougou and some suburbs of Dakar the
programme will assist partners with the implementation of local plans for the

8

development of basic education, pooling the resources of the Government, local
communities and donors with a view to establishing the necessary human an d
financial resources needed by disadvantaged communities. The schools will receive
support for development plans based on the child-friendly school concept, including
a package of activities aimed at improving learning conditions, creating a safe
environment to encourage the reintegration of dropout children, making the school
part of the system for the protection of children at risk and ensuring the participation
of children and parents. Local authorities, principals, teachers and parents will be
empowered to monitor the performance of children, teachers and schools.
28. Protection of children. Poverty and recurrent shocks have weakened
traditional protection systems and exacerbated the problems suffered by children.
The programme will help the country respond to those challenges by promoting the
speedy development of a holistic child protection system, including in the areas of
welfare and juvenile justice, and combining arrangements both for prevention and
for assistance. The expected outcome of this component is that, by 2016, children,
and in particular children forced to beg, to undergo female circumcision or to
perform labour and children in conflict with the law, will be less susceptible to
violence, exploitation, neglect and harmful practices.
29. The programme will assist the Government in its efforts to strengthen the
institutional framework for child protection by revising existing regulations and
bringing them into line with international recommendations. It will contribute to the
development of a child protection strategy and the creation of a midterm
expenditure framework, in order to improve resource mobilization and to increase
the availability of protection services. To ensure the equitable distribution of
resources and services necessary to prevent abuse, violence, exploitation and
discrimination and to respond to those practices, the programme will support the
development of an integrated services system, with the definition of a package of
services that comply with minimum standards, and the development of a care and
referral system with the necessary protocols for such a system, which will also
include the national education system. The programme will also strengthen the
capacity of professionals, semi professionals and community stakeholde rs and
support the establishment of a data management and case monitoring system, the
creation of special national birth registration arrangements and the management of a
cash transfer programme for vulnerable children and families. It will also foster
positive changes in social norms by creating a social movement that targets such
harmful practices as begging, girl child labour and female circumcision.
30. The programme will help national partners increase the supply and improve
the quality of the package of community based protection services in the
departments of Tambacounda, Kédougou, Kolda, Sédhiou, Matam, Fatick, Saint
Louis, Thies and Dakar, with emphasis on more efficient coordination, monitoring
the performance of decentralized services, according professional status to social
workers, ensuring the provision of quality services and carrying out prevention
activities.
31. Social policies and advocacy programme. An analysis of the dynamics of
poverty has shown that children were significantly and chron ically affected by many
hardships attributable to the weakness and inefficiency of social services and
deficiencies in the systems for the planning, allocation and use of available
resources. The programme will help to redress this situation, aiming for th e

9

following result: by 2016, children, in particular the most vulnerable, will receive
better care thanks to the targeting and budgeting of social protection systems and
social policies.
32. The programme will assist the relevant ministries and civil socie ty to
strengthen their capabilities in their endeavours to formulate, implement and
measure the impact of child-friendly policies, while focusing on marginalized
children. This will be achieved through the conduct of accurate budget analyses, use
of the so-called “marginal budgeting for bottlenecks” tool in the health and
education sector, operationalization of the midterm expenditure framework of the
Ministry of Family Affairs and analysis of the barriers preventing access by children
to social services and locking them in the cycle whereby poverty is transmitted from
generation to generation. To ensure a more adequate response to the needs of
socially excluded children, in departments covered by the sectoral components on
survival, education and protection, the programme will help build the capacity of
regional development agencies and local communities to monitor the situation of
children and to carry out participatory planning and budgeting.
33. The programme will support the development of tools for the regular
monitoring of the situation of children, the conduct of surveys (population surveys
and multiple indicator cluster surveys — MICS) and the preparation of reports on
the situation of children for submission to international committees. Advocacy and
building alliances with civil society, the private sector, influential commentators and
the media will keep the issue of children’s rights at the centre of the national
agenda.
34. The cross-sectoral costs will relate to the operational and logistical aspects of
the programme and the improved management capacity of UNICEF staff and
partners. They will also subsume support costs for the implementation of the
programme and some operating costs of the country office.
Major partnerships
35. The programme will be implemented in partnership with the ministries of
economy and finance, health, education, family affairs and justice and their
decentralized and local offices. A strengthened partnership will be forged with the
Ministry of Decentralization and Local Communities and the union of local elected
officials, in matters relating to decentralization and the Local Child -Friendly
Communities initiative. UNICEF will strengthen its partnership with the United
States Agency for International Development, the World Bank, the delegation of the
European Union, the Belgian, Canadian, French, German, Italian, Japanese,
Luxembourg and Spanish development agencies, the African Development Bank,
the World Health Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund, the International Labour Office, the International Organization for
Migration, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United Nations
Development Programme, in matters related to health, education, nutrition and
social protection. Cooperation will be stepped up with United Nations agencies in
the conduct of joint programmes on health, nutrition and social protection. By
joining efforts with non governmental organizations (Plan International, Save the

10

Children, World Vision, ChildFund International, Action Aid) and members of the
national coalition of children’s non-governmental organizations, the partnership will
be able to pool the assistance resources available and enhance the cost -effectiveness
of its health, education and protection activities.
Programme monitoring, evaluation and management
36. By analysing trends in the immunization, school enrolment and academic
success indicators and those on the number of child victims of violence and abuse
that have been properly taken into care, it will be po ssible to track the progress of
the programme. To measure progress at the department level other indicators will be
used, such as those on the availability of children’s services and on their use by
children and those on parents’ awareness of best practices. Emphasis will be placed
on the use of data disaggregated by region, age and sex to ensure the effective
monitoring of the programme’s impact on the reduction of disparities.
37. By identifying trends in budgetary allocations to children’s programmes and
the related budgetary performance under the social sectors’ midterm expenditure
framework it will be possible to measure the impact of the social policies. The
programme outcomes matrix and the integrated monitoring and evaluation plan,
which are linked to the UNDAF matrix, will be used as instruments to monitor
progress towards the strategic outcomes. Internal instruments for programme
monitoring and evaluation and the national monitoring system will be strengthened.
Coordination arrangements under the control of the Government, at both national
and local levels, will be strengthened to ensure a more effective division of labour
between partners and to boost the effectiveness of their joint work.

11

