Serbia
Country programme document
2011-2015
UNICEF activities in Kosovo under United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1244 (1999)

The draft country programme document for Serbia
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.5) and (E/ICEF/2010/P/L.5/Add.1) was
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its
2010 annual session (1-4 June 2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 9 September 2010.

Serbia
Basic data †
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

2.2

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

7

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2005)

1a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)

13

Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2007)

95/95

Survival rate to last primary grade (%)

.. b

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

99

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

92

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2007)

0.1

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2005)
GNI per capita (US$)

4
6 440

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

95

One-year-olds immunized with measles vaccine (%)

92

†

a
b

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org.
World Health Organization child growth standard.
The primary school completion rate is 92% from the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
(MICS) 2005, covering children through grade 8, the end of compulsory education in Serbia.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Serbia enjoyed a stable and relatively strong growth rate from 2002 through
mid-2008. The prospect of integration into the European Union (EU) is driving the
comprehensive reforms of the economic and social sectors initiated at the beginning
of the decade. The Government succeeded in improving macroeconomic stability,
restructuring the economy and re-establishing many social provisions that had
severely deteriorated during the 1990s. Democracy and the rule of law have been
consolidated, with the adoption of new parliamentary rules of procedure, broad
reform of the judiciary, and the establishment of independent institutions, including
an Ombudsman, an Anti-Corruption Agency, and the Supreme Audit Institution.
2.
Poverty levels were halved between 2002 and 2007, dropping from 14.7 to
7.7 per cent. 1 While poverty reduction was achieved without raising levels of
inequality, 2 children under 14 years continue to have above-average poverty indexes
and represent the population group with the lowest level of poverty reduction over
this period. 3
3.
The global economic and financial crisis is having a far-reaching impact on the
country. Economic growth declined to 4 per cent, with projections of a slow
recovery in 2010 and 2011. The Government negotiated a non-precautionary
standby agreement with the International Monetary Fund in Mar ch 2009, securing a
€3 billion loan to support the balance of payments. The agreement allows a budget
__________________
1
2
3

2

Republican Statistical Office (RSO), Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS), 2007.
The Gini coefficient was 29.3 in 2002 and 29.7 in 2007. RSO, LSMS, 2007.
www.prsp.gov.rs.

deficit of 4 per cent of the gross domestic product, but commits the authorities to
significant fiscal tightening, including substantial cuts in public ex penditure.
Despite the crisis, the overall levels of social spending and social transfers have
been safeguarded. Poverty, nevertheless, has increased since the crisis began, and
the existing safety nets are far from sufficient.
4.
A 2009 analysis of the implementation of the National Plan of Action for
Children 4 is showing that much progress has been made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, particularly in the areas of health, reform of social
services, and development of the normative frame work. The under-five mortality
rate has fallen to 7 deaths per 1,000 live births, 5 and the infant mortality rate
decreased from 10.6 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2000 to 6.7 in 2008. While
national-level trends are positive, they hide disparities, notably those affecting the
Roma minority, which has an under-five mortality rate three times higher than that
of the general population. 6
5.
The economic crisis has exacerbated existing disparities in the country, making
the situation of the already vulnerable even more precarious. The situation of Roma
is particularly critical: nearly 50 per cent of Roma families are living below the
poverty line and unemployment rates among Ro ma are estimated at 60 per cent.7
Geographic disparities are also significant, between rural and urban and among
municipalities: for example, the poverty rate is 9.8 per cent in rural areas but 4.3 per
cent in urban areas, and municipalities in South Serbia are among the poorest in the
country. 8 Compounding this is the paucity of opportunities or means for the
marginalized to influence decisions that could improve their situation. The
2008/2009 presidency by Serbia of the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005 -2015
brought greater attention and commitment to Roma inclusion. At the same time, the
Serbia EU integration process is pushing social inclusion higher up the Government
agenda. This effort will further intensify when Serbia becomes a candidate country
and drafts the Joint Inclusion Memorandum in cooperation with the EU.
6.
Education coverage has remained high, but the (gross) completion rates are
much lower for selected groups, namely, children who are Roma (28 per cent), poor
(77 per cent) and rural (89 per cent). Data are not available for net completion.
Quality remains a challenge, with learning achievement falling at the bottom of the
PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) scale; resulting in a
learning deficit equal to 2-3 years of education. 9 Attendance rates for the newly
established obligatory year of pre-school for 6-year-olds are at 98 per cent, 10 but
less than 50 per cent among Roma and rural children. The new Law on Education
has strong provisions aimed at improving the inclusiveness and quality of education,
critical to ensuring that those outside the system are broug ht in.
__________________
4

5
6

7
8
9

10

Committee on the Rights of the Child, National Plan of Action for Children Analysis,
October 2009.
There were 7 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2008 versus 12.7 in 2000. RSO, Vital Statistics.
UNICEF, Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS), 2005. Note: All data relating to Roma
population from MICS refer only to Roma living in Roma settlements.
Roma Information Centre, Roma at National Employment Service, October 2006.
RSO, LSMS, 2007.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Programme for International Student
Assessment Study, 2006.
2006/2007 school year. RSO, LSMS, 2007.

3

7.
Serbian young people, whose childhoods were largely neglected during the
period of conflict and isolation, continue to suffer the consequences today. These
include males, who often adopt cultural values perpetuating aggressive behaviour
and tolerating violence. From 2005 to 2008, the number and severity of reported
crimes committed by juveniles have risen, particularly crimes involving theft and
violence. 11 There are increasing trends of adolescent risk-taking behaviour,
including consumption of alcohol, and early, unsafe sexual activity that contributes
to a teenage pregnancy rate of 15.6. 12 An estimated 16 per cent of adolescents aged
15-18 are out of school (13 per cent of girls and 20 per cent of boys). Among Roma,
the situation is much worse: 94 per cent of girls and 86 per cent of boys are out of
school. 13 Adolescents lack tailored services, particularly in the areas of health and
education, and have limited opportunities for recreation and leisure. However, the
Government has begun to respond to their needs. The Government adopted a
National Youth Strategy in 2008 and an Action Plan in 2009, and established a
Ministry of Youth and Sport as well as youth offices in 100 municipalities that
provide a starting point to support youth in exercising the ir rights.
8.
As for children aged 0-6, national understanding and prioritization of early
childhood development as a critical contribution to building the country ‟s social
capital is only beginning to emerge. There are still no integrated early childhood
development (ECD) services. Parenting has been largely ignored by system
interventions, and as a result parents have poor awareness of the importance of the
early years and limited knowledge of how to support the development of young
children. 14 Traditional gender roles are pronounced, as 76 per cent of young men
believe that caring for children is the responsibility of mothers. 15 Preschool
participation is low, with only 40 per cent of the general population sending children
aged 3-5 to preschool, with the percentage dropping to less than 10 per cent for
Roma and rural children. 16
9.
Concerning post-natal care: Serbian hospitals currently do not comply with
baby-friendly hospital standards; new mothers commonly express dissatisfaction
with the attitudes and behaviours of medical staff; and only 15 per cent of mothers
practice exclusive breastfeeding.
10. Violence continues to be a challenge, including within the family environment.
Disciplining of children by physical or psychological punishment is practiced o n
73 per cent of children aged 2-14, with boys more likely than girls to be exposed to
severe forms of punishment. An estimated 37 per cent of young school children
report peer violence, and this percentage rises to 55 among children in higher
grades. The Committee on the Rights of the Child in its 2008 Concluding
Observations recommended that the Government take measures to end all violence
against children. The 2007 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the
__________________
11
12

13
14
15

16

4

RSO, 2008.
The rate is defined as 1 per 1,000 adolescents aged 15 to 19. National Institute for Public
Health, 2007.
UNICEF, MICS, 2005.
UNICEF, MICS, 2005.
CARE and International Centre for Research on Women, “The Initiative of Young Men for
Prevention of Violence Based on Gender in the Northwestern Balkans Programme ”, 2009 (not
published).
RSO, LSMS, 2007.

Elimination of Discrimination against Women also emphasized combating domestic
violence as a continuing challenge to be addressed.
11. The reforms of social services have benefited children without parental care.
However, children with severe disabilities are still routinely placed in institution al
care. And those living in families often remain isolated and excluded from their
communities. A lack of community services and support for disabled children and
their families further reinforces exclusionary practices.
12. The progress made by Serbia in the formation of democratic institutions has
included establishing building blocks for a child rights infrastructure, such as the
Deputy Ombudsman Office in 2008, the National Council on Child Rights in 2002
and a specific Parliamentary body on child rights, created in 2008. The legislative
framework has been largely aligned with international human rights standards.
However, the requisite adjustments to the allocations of resources, standards for
services and professionals, and accountability mechanisms a re all lagging behind.
The adoption in 2009 of a regulatory framework for non-governmental
organizations was an important step forward in acknowledging the value of civil
society, although there are still no institutional mechanisms to facilitate exchange
between government and civil society. Moreover, civil society remains fragmented
and unable to systematically influence policy-making at national or local levels. Of
particular concern is the lack of disaggregated data and specific indicators to
monitor the impact of system reforms.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2010
Key results achieved
13. Government commitment to the reform of the social welfare system, including
the transformation of social services and residential care institutions, is producing
tangible results. These have become a model for other countries in the region,
including Azerbaijan, Georgia and the Republic of Moldova, where similar
transformation plans are in place. Standards and quality assurance measures for
community services have been introduced, and a case management approach is
reflected in the draft social welfare law. There has been a steady reduction of the
number of children placed in residential care institutions. The ratio of children in
institutional versus foster care has been reversed from 2:1 to 1:2. 17
14. Serbia made significant progress in establishing a juvenile justice system,
adopting a Law on Juvenile Justice in 2006 in line with international standards.
Specialized training for judges, prosecutors and the police on juvenile offenders and
minors-victims has been mainstreamed, in line with the law. This experience has
been recognized and shared within the region as good practice. With the creation of
an intersectoral Juvenile Justice Council in 2009, further reforms needed for full
implementation of the diversion provisions of the law will be set in motion.
15. A regulatory framework to prevent and protect children from violence has
been adopted. This was followed by the specialized protocols for key sectors,
__________________
17

Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Analytical Department, Draft master plan on the
transformation of residential institutions.

5

notably health, social welfare, justice and education. In each of these sectors,
capacity development of professionals has been undertaken. The majority of
advances can be noted in the education system, where implementation of t he
Schools without Violence standards have led to improved reporting of violence and
greater use of non-violent conflict resolution. The success of this approach has
allowed the Ministry of Education to leverage further support from a World Bank
programme.
16. The 2009 review of the National Plan of Action for Children found that the
plan had significant influence on the development of key policies, notably those
related to protection. In selected municipalities, the plan has also been successfully
translated into local plans of action to develop participatory planning processes that
involve local authorities, civic organizations and children themselves. UNICEF will
advocate for this approach to be sustained and championed nationwide as the core
component of “municipalities fit for children”.
17. A number of successful partnerships were initiated and have flourished during
the country programme. Notable among these is the partnership with the private
sector supporting Schools without Violence, which has grown from being
implemented in 4 primary schools in 2005 to 183 currently, with full funding
achieved through local resource mobilization. Partnership with the media has also
evolved, with ethical standards on children included in the journalists ‟ code of
conduct.
18. Partnership with newly established independent institutions — the Deputy
Ombudsman for Children and a Parliamentary Working Group on Children — began
only at the end of the country programme, but has already demonstrated positive
impact. It is likely that the Parliamentary Working Group will be established by law,
with more systematic attention given to children by Parliament.
Lessons learned
19. Strengthening accountability both inside and outside the formal system is
emerging as a strategic area of focus. At the request of the Government, the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative, which was taken over by the Government in 2002, was
evaluated in 2009. Concerted pressure from mothers‟ groups pushed the
Government to take this action, demonstrating the potential influence of civil
society to demand quality services and hold the system accountable. The evaluation
revealed that the standards are not met in most baby-friendly hospitals and that there
is no health system oversight of compliance. Similarl y, a formal government review
of the child care system reform in 2009 reconfirmed that accountability mechanisms
are needed both within and outside the social welfare system. UNICEF has been
recognized as playing a catalytic role in supporting the Governme nt to strengthen its
quality assurance systems and in brokering partnerships to reinforce independent
monitoring of results for all children.
20. The need for greater coordination among the sectors having responsibility for
children has been documented in two recent evaluations of the work of UNICEF
Serbia in the areas of juvenile justice and schools without violence. Both studies
found that without systematic case conferencing, referral and coordinated follow -up
among health, education, social welfare and justice professionals, vulnerable
children slip through the cracks of the system. The need for greater coordination has
also been recognized by the Government as a critical shortcoming which must be

6

addressed if system reforms are to have a tangible impact on children. UNICEF has
been sought to play a convening role in the establishment and strengthening of
intersectoral mechanisms for coordination, be they related to policy and planning at
the national level or service delivery at the local level.
21. UNICEF Serbia has been able to influence national policies and programmes
through small-scale modelling of innovative approaches. The 2009 Law on
Education mainstreams good-practice modelling in active learning and violence
prevention, whereas the draft Social Welfare Law has incorporated
recommendations generated from UNICEF engagement in child care reform.
Experience has shown that modelling is most likely to influence policies when it is:
(a) designed and monitored with the maximum engagement of policymaker s;
(b) directly linked to implementation of national priorities; and (c) adequately
documented and communicated, with technical support provided for translating
practice into policy.
The country programme, 2011-2015
22. The CPD was developed in conjunction with the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) preparation, beginning with a Common Country
Assessment and including a prioritization workshop with the Government of Serbia
in November 2009. The CPD development further benefited from bilateral
consultations with key partners and stakeholders, within and outside of Government.
These consultations helped to validate the future role of UNICEF and further clarify
and define the country programme components, ensuring that they are strategi c and
complement other initiatives and partnerships planned by the Government. The CPD
is additionally informed by the 2008 Concluding Observations of the Committee on
the Rights of the Child, and the 2007 Concluding Observations of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
23. The draft country programme document provides a financial framework for
UNICEF cooperation in Serbia. UNICEF activities in Kosovo are being planned and
implemented in accordance with United Nations Security Co uncil resolution 1244
(1999).
Table 1. Summary budget table*
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 375

13 500

14 875

875

8 000

8 875

Cross-sectoral

1 500

2 000

3 500

Total

3 750

23 500

27 250

Systems-strengthening for social inclusion
Social accountability for child rights

* Other resources requirements for UNICEF activities in Kosovo are provided separately in
table 2.

Programme components results and strategies
24. The overall goal of the country programme is to support national efforts
towards social inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized families and children, in

7

line with international human and child rights standards and national sustainable
development and inclusion strategies. As data clearly demonstrate, the populations
who are already or likely to be excluded include those living below the poverty line,
the Roma minority, children with disabilities, and children in rural areas. Also
vulnerable are most-at-risk adolescents and other children whose rights are
systematically violated. The key results of the programme by the end of 2015 will
be: (a) an increased number of excluded children and families benefit from
education, social welfare, and justice services, in line with new legislation; and (b) a
strengthened child rights infrastructure and enhanced civic and private engagement
to realize children‟s rights.
25. The programme of cooperation will contribute to: (a) an increase in the
preschool enrolment rate among Roma and rural children aged 3-5; (b) an
improvement in the ratio of alternative family-based care for children with
disabilities to institutionalized care; (c) a decrease in the proportion of adolescents
out of school; (d) the establishment and effective functioning of structural
mechanisms to monitor progress towards social inclusion; and (e) an increase in the
allocation of resources for the realization of children‟s rights.
26. The country programme will employ a mix of strategies across the pr iority
focus areas of early childhood development, child protection, adolescent health and
development and civic engagement for child rights. In all areas, UNICEF will
facilitate the strengthening of intersectoral cooperation and approaches and will
drive the generation and sharing of knowledge and evidence to further inform
policies and practice towards their eventual scaling up and institutionalization.
Support to systems-strengthening will be complemented by partnership-building for
social change at the individual and community levels and for consistent monitoring.
Gender will be a cross-cutting theme throughout programme elements, particularly
concerning the roles and responsibilities of mothers and fathers within the family,
knowledge generation on adolescent behaviours and opportunities, and in the
context of violence prevention and response. Emergency preparedness will also be
an integral feature of the country programme.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
27. The Government has set an ambitious midterm agenda covering the political,
economic, social, administrative, and governance spectrum, with EU integration as
the main driver of reforms. The National Sustainable Development Strategy and
Action Plan and the National Plan for Integration provide the national strategic
framework for UNICEF cooperation. These same strategies guide the UNDAF, with
20-some agencies operating in Serbia contributing to multiple dimensions. UNICEF
leadership areas within the UNDAF relate specifically to soc ial inclusion, with a
strong focus on expanded access to quality basic social services for vulnerable
groups. Contributions will also be made to the good governance pillar in the areas of
juvenile justice, strengthening independent institutions, enhancing data systems, and
enabling the participation of civil society in policymaking.
Relationship to international priorities
28. The Millennium Declaration, the Millennium Development Goals and the
priorities of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013, are integrated
into the country programme, with a strong focus on child protection, gender equality

8

and social inclusion. UNICEF support will aim to complete the “unfinished
business” of the Millennium Development Goals, with focused attention on
inclusion of marginalized groups of children.
Programme components
29. The country programme will be organized around two programme
components, namely: (a) systems-strengthening for social inclusion; and (b) social
accountability for children‟s rights. The two components together will assist the
Government and key partners to guarantee that marginalized boys and girls benefit
from inclusive social services and to create an enabling environment for the
realization of children‟s rights.
Systems-strengthening for social inclusion
30. As the Government pursues reforms of its basic social services systems, to
ensure access to quality services for all, it has sought the continued assistance of
UNICEF. Under this programme component, UNICEF will support the G overnment
to: (a) align its regulatory frameworks with reformed laws and policies, in line with
international standards; (b) model implementation of key provisions of new
legislation in order to develop lower-level procedures and regulations; and
(c) generate knowledge and evidence on children and adolescents. The support to
systems-strengthening will prioritize areas identified by the Government that require
a multisectoral approach and remain a challenge for Serbia in implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
31. ECD will be enhanced through support to coherent multisectoral ECD
planning and standard-setting, to strengthen the continuum of services available.
The primary focus will be on children not currently benefiting from the system,
notably Roma, rural children, children with disabilities and children living in
poverty. Particular attention will be paid to: (a) improving the quality and
accountability of pre- and post-natal care services, ensuring that they meet set
standards, reach the most vulnerable and support parents to provide adequate care;
and (b) increasing enrolment for the most disadvantaged children 3 -5 years old into
preschool programmes and children 6 years old into a c ompulsory year of preschool.
32. Progress made in establishing a strong normative framework for child
protection will be the starting point for expanding access for the most vulnerable
children, especially children with disabilities, children without paren tal care,
children at risk of violence and abuse, and children in conflict with law, to existing
and new social welfare and protective services. Priority will be given to
transformation of centralized, institution-based services into family- and
community- based services. Development of accountability mechanisms for quality
assurance, and improving access to and use of data, will be prioritized. Cross sectoral mechanisms for responding to abuse and neglect will be strengthened so
that these mechanisms become fully operational and are regularly monitored within
the health, education, social welfare and justice sectors. Modelling of innovative
cross-sectoral services, such as social welfare and health support services for
inclusive education, will kick-start implementation of new laws and define by-laws
and regulations.

9

33. Programming for adolescent health and development will emphasize the
generation of knowledge and evidence about adolescent behaviours, needs and
choices, as well as system gaps and responses. Based on these findings, UNICEF
will foster the development and institutionalization of new alternative services for
groups such as adolescents-at-risk, including juvenile offenders, adolescents at risk
of HIV, and school dropouts. Coordination mechanisms among key Ministries will
be bolstered at national and local levels to establish a more holistic approach to
adolescents. In this regard, special attention will be paid to early identification and
prevention of school dropout, which has been identified b y the Government as a
priority for UNICEF cooperation.
34. While the programme will be national in scope, efforts will be concentrated in
the poorest municipalities with the worst development indicators. South Serbia has
already been identified as one such region, and is the focus of a joint United Nations
programme of cooperation designed to promote access to basic services and prevent
conflict. UNICEF Serbia will continue to facilitate South-South exchange of
knowledge and experience, particularly in the areas of child care and juvenile justice
systems reform, inclusive education for the Roma, and strengthening data collection
systems.
Social accountability for children’s rights
35. As experience has shown, systems reform is essential but not sufficie nt to
guarantee that children‟s rights are fully respected. The State system must be
complemented and reinforced with actions outside of Government. The second
programme component will aim to enhance social accountability for children ‟s
rights.
36. This programme component will employ strategies to spark civic engagement
and demand for child rights, including: (a) strengthening external oversight and
monitoring of system reforms; (b) empowering rights holders to demand and claim
their rights and entitlements; and (c) promoting positive behaviours and combating
discrimination. It will require the building of strategic alliances that go beyond
advocacy and awareness-raising, and are constructed based on mutual responsibility.
The programme will rely heavily on C4D strategies in order to complement the
systems reforms, ensuring that services meet the needs of the most vulnerable and
are widely used by them.
37. Engagement with civil society organizations will be pursued to enable more
systematic participation in policy development and monitoring. Focus will be on
coalition-building, enabling self-representation of excluded groups and brokering
space for expanded dialogue with the Government. Child -focused civil society
networks will be supported to advocate for positive behaviour change and
improvements in services for young children, children with disabilities and
adolescents. In particular, youth-led organizations and peer networks will be enabled
to promote healthy choices, intercultural understanding and non -violent conflict
resolution, including through the School without Violence initiatives. Work with
parents‟ organizations will emphasize better parenting practices and more active
engagement with schools, health centres and other service providers.
38. Capitalizing on the establishment of institutions with a statutory responsibility
for oversight of child rights, the programme aims to strengthen the capacities of and
cooperation among the Deputy Ombudsman for Children, the Parliamentary

10

Working Group for Child Rights and the National Council on Child Rights to
promote and monitor implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Priority will be given to improving ex ante compatibility checks with international
and regional standards before legislation is adopted and to strengthen the monitoring
and reporting on the impact of laws and strategies on children.
39. At the subnational level, partnership will continue with local authorities.
Based on the Local Plans of Action experience, standards for child-friendly
municipalities will be defined and widely promoted. UNICEF will support the
exchange of good practices among municipalities, particularly in the areas of local
budgeting for children, intersectoral cooperation and child participation.
40. The programme will further develop its resource mobilization capacities
through expansion of its alliances and a stronger focus on leveraging. In partnership
with corporate sector and media partners, UNICEF will promote positive business
practices and child-focused corporate social responsibility. Such collaboration will
encourage innovation and development of new solutions, and will build alliances to
influence decisions for children and mobilize resources. Further expansion of
capacities of the media to improve reporting on children and establish monitoring
systems will be prioritized, as will integration of child rights into the Journalism
University curriculum.
41. As reliable and user-friendly data is essential for all partners in monitoring
progress towards social inclusion, efforts will continue to refine and improve the
national DevInfo system, under the management of the Republican Statistical
Office. Particular focus will be placed on increasing availability of disaggregated
data and revising the indicators so that they can be used more easily and are
consistent with national Millennium Development Goals targets, national plans and
broader social inclusion indicators. Support will also be provided to expand usage of
DevInfo at the local level as a tool for local planning and reporting.
Cross-sectoral costs
42. Cross-sectoral costs cover salaries of cross-cutting staff; travel, training and
equipment, as necessary; and additional operational support to country office
management and administration.
Major partnerships
43. Strong partnerships will be central to UNICEF cooperation. Principal national
partners will include the Ministries of Labour and Social Policy, Education, Health,
Youth and Sport, Human and Minority Rights, Regional and Local Develop ment,
Finance, Interior, and Justice; the Social Inclusion Team of the Deputy Prime
Minister‟s Office; the National Council for Children‟s Rights; the Ombudsman‟s
Office; Parliament; and the Standing Conference of Municipalities. Close
collaboration will be established with research institutes and universities, civil
society organizations, the corporate sector, and the media.
44. Within the United Nations country team, UNICEF will continue to play an
active role in the implementation of the new UNDAF, including in several joint
programmes. Continued cooperation with the EU will be prioritized, particularly as
the Government prepares its Joint Inclusion Memorandum. Cooperation with the
World Bank will be strengthened in the areas of health, education and soci al

11

welfare. Among bilaterals, continued partnership is planned with the Swiss
Development Cooperation in education and in the joint work in South Serbia, along
with the Norwegian Agency for International Development and Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency. Italian cooperation is a key partner
in the area of expanding services and support for children with disabilities.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The implementation of the current cooperation arrangement will be monitored
through joint annual reviews, as well as a midterm review of progress in 2013.
Baselines will be established in each area of cooperation. National monitoring
systems, notably DevInfo, will provide information on progress and results
achieved.
46. A situation analysis will be developed using new data generated from the
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey in 2010, the 2011 national census results and the
planned Survey of Income and Living Standards. A secondary data analysis of the
status of children and children poverty will be undertaken on the basis of the
Household Budget Survey data. Studies on adolescent behaviour and needs will be
prioritized in the first half of the country programme, while a comprehensive
evaluation of the child care system reform will be conducted in the second half.
Additional research will be undertaken as needed to provide more in -depth analysis
on key issues.

UNICEF activities in Kosovo under United Nations Security Council resolution
1244 (1999)

47. Kosovo has one of the youngest populations in Europe, but also an extremely
high overall unemployment rate at 48 per cent, which rises to 71 per cent among 1924-year olds. In addition, it is estimated that between 25 per cent and 35 per cent of
employment is in agriculture, most of which is in the informal sector. According to
World Bank data for 2006, poverty remains widespread and persistent, with 45 per
cent of the population living below the poverty line of 1.42 euro per adult equivalent
per day, while 17 per cent live in extreme poverty (food poverty line - 0.93 euro per
day), One child in two lives below the poverty line and child and maternal mortality
remain amongst the highest in the region. Key systemic gaps include weak
institutional capacities in governance, rule of law and justice, protection of human
rights, particularly concerning discrimination against vulnerable groups, girls and
women, as well as high rates of gender-based violence.
48. UNICEF activities in Kosovo are being planned and implemented in
accordance with United Nations Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
programme focuses on two key elements: (a) quality social services, and (b)
community mobilization. It will also be engaged in policy advocacy and
partnerships for children‟s rights, focusing on Roma and social inclusion, child
poverty and budgeting for children. UNICEF will aim at strengthening partnerships
with key partners in Kosovo to jointly establish sound evidence on child poverty.
49. Quality social services. The overall objective is to establish a child- and youthfriendly policy and normative framework based on international human rights

12

standards, and to strengthen systems for the provision of quality social services for
children, young people and women.
50. In the area of safe motherhood and early childhood development, the
programme will aim at ensuring increased access to improved maternal and child
health services by most vulnerable groups, especially minority communities, by
enhancing the capacity of service providers. This component will also support
maintaining high immunization coverage and reducing micronutrient deficiencies
through food fortification and other nutrition interventions.
51. In the area of education, the programme will centre its activities on inclusive
and quality education and will provide technical and programmatic guidance to
partners to finalize and validate early learning and development standards. Child friendly school standards will be completed and implemented as part of the revised
education curriculum framework. A comprehensive assessment will be conducted on
the situation of early child education in Kosovo to establish sex -disaggregated
baseline data and indicators and to help to inform evidence -based policies.
52. In the area of young people‟s health, development and participation, UNICEF
will support the implementation of agreed action plans, including an HIV/AIDS
strategy, and provide technical assistance, especially for monitoring and evaluation.
A „young voices‟ opinion poll will help to galvanize the attention of key
stakeholders for investment in youth.
53. Juvenile justice reforms will be a major focus of UNICEF child protection
activities, including capacity-building of juvenile justice professionals, development
of a data management strategy for improved monitoring of juvenile justice reforms,
as well as development of juvenile justice indicators. UNICEF will support an
assessment of the child protection system and will strengthen the capacity of the
Ombudsperson to monitor child rights, in collaboration with other duty-bearers.
54. Community mobilization. The overall objective of community mobilization is
to enable families, communities, children, young people and women to increase
their skills and knowledge so that they can demand better-quality services, have
their voices heard, and contribute to efforts to respect and monitor human rights.
55. This component will aim at ensuring increased demand for services by the
most vulnerable beneficiaries, especially minority communities. This wil l be
accomplished through social mobilization activities related to better parenting, safe
motherhood, elimination of lead poisoning, and other public health issues relevant
for Kosovo. In such initiatives, implementing partners will explore ways to
strengthen the role of men and boys in ensuring gender equality and will use gender and culture-sensitive communication messages.
56. The programme will continue to support the strengthening of student councils
in secondary schools so that the councils become a leading voice for students.
Support will also be provided to young peer educators and their outreach activities,
which promote gender equality and behaviours that are not based on gender
stereotypes.

13

Table 2. Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Other resources

Quality Social Services

13 300

Community Mobilisation

8,950

Cross-sectoral

4,750

Total

27 000

57. The following table provides a consolidated budget summary for UNICEF
cooperation in Serbia together with UNICEF activities in Kosovo that are being
planned and implemented in accordance with United Nations Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).
Table 3. Consolidated summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

1 375

13 500

14 875

875

8 000

8 875

Quality social services

-

13 300

13 300

Community mobilization

-

8,950

8,950

Cross-sectoral

1 500

6,750

8,250

Total

3 750

50 500

54,250

Systems-strengthening for social inclusion
Social accountability for child rights

14

