Sierra Leone
Country programme document
2015-2018

The draft country programme document for Sierra Leone
(E/ICEF/2014/P/L.10) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2014 annual session (3-6 June
2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data † (2012 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, under 5 years, moderate & severe, 2010)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

1.4/1.4
182
22
24/20, 20/22, 22/15
890 a

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2011)

57

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2011)

13

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

84 b

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

80 b

Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2010)

73/76

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2010)

93/92

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years, male/female)

1.2/1.7

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female, 2010)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2010)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

b

..
27/25
78
78/78, 78/78, 74/88
580

More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org/.
The figure reported in the above table is the adjusted maternal mortality ratio estimate
prepared by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. The reported estimate at
country level is 857 deaths per 100,000 live births (2008), as presented in the Demographic
and Health Survey, 2008.
The immunization figures reported in the above table are inter-agency estimates prepared by
WHO/UNICEF. The data disaggregated by sex are as follows: DPT3, male (72 per cent) and
female (71 per cent); and measles, male (84 per cent) and female (79 per cent), from the
multiple indicator cluster survey, 2010.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Sierra Leone is consolidating peace after a devastating civil war that lasted from
1991 to 2002. Left a fragile State by the war, it is now in transition to becoming a
developing country. Political stability is progressing well, as confirmed by the third
round of credible presidential, parliamentary and local council elections in November
2012. The United Nations Security Council, recognizing the positive changes, decided
to end the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone by 31 March 2014. However, the poverty rate is still high and access to social
services and infrastructure is inadequate. The poverty reduction strategy paper (2013 2018), also called ‘Agenda for Prosperity’, seeks to address these challenges. Sierra
Leone is unlikely to achieve most of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
2.
Gross domestic product grew by 13.3 per cent in 2013. Domestic revenue
accounted for 80 per cent of the total government budget, with grants from

2/12

development partners accounting for the remaining 20 per cent. 1 The proportion of
the population in absolute poverty declined from 66.4 per cent to 52.9 per cent
between 2003 and 2011. Poverty is concentrated largely in rural areas but absolute
poverty in the capital (Freetown) increased from 14 per cent to 21 per cent during that
period. Around 14 per cent of the population is extremely poor, meaning that even if
these approximately 860,000 people spent all their income on food, they would not
meet basic nutritional requirements. 2 Social protection is weak and uncoordinated.
3.
Access to health services for children and mothers has improved since the
introduction of the Free Health Care Initiative for children below 5 years, pregnant
women and breastfeeding mothers. About 97 per cent o f pregnant women attend at
least one antenatal clinic, and deliveries in health facilities have increased from 25 per
cent in 2008 to 56 per cent in 2013. Under-five mortality stands at 156 per 1,000 live
births. 3 The main causes of these deaths are malaria, diarrhoea, acute respiratory
infections and neonatal events. Maternal mortality is still high, estimated at 890 per
100,000 live births, and 40 per cent of these deaths are among adolescents.
Undernutrition is prevalent among children and pregnant women . About 38 per cent
of children under 5 are stunted and 80 per cent of children aged 6 -59 months are
anaemic. Only 32 per cent of infants under 6 months are exclusively breastfed. 4
4.
An estimated 48,000 Sierra Leoneans are living with HIV, of which 4,400 are
children. HIV prevalence among women is 1.7 per cent compared to 1.2 per cent
among men. An especially vulnerable group comprises an estimated 180,000 to
300,000 women (between 4 per cent and 5 per cent of the population) who exchange
sex for money or other items. Over half of this group is believed to be under 25 years
of age, with 5 per cent under 15 years. 5 Out of 1,200 health facilities nationwide, only
131 provide antiretroviral treatment, while 687 provide prevention of mother -to-child
transmission services. Just 3 per cent of infants receive early diagnosis.
5.
Little safe water is supplied. Water and sanitation infrastructure is inadequate,
as are hygiene practices in homes, schools and health facilities. About 57 per cent of
the population has access to an improved drinking water source (84 per cent in urban
areas, 40 per cent in rural areas). Just 13 per cent of the population uses non -shared,
improved sanitation facilities (22 per cent in urban areas, 7 per cent in rural areas).
6.
Population growth is putting increasing pressure on the environment. Rapid
growth in unplanned urban areas is a serious concern. The environment also faces
challenges from activities such as mining and from forest exploitation and poor solid
waste collection and management. Subsistence agriculture has caused land
degradation. The poorest communities are especially at risk of storms, floods, fires
and other natural disasters, exacerbated by climate change, as well as epidemics.
7.
School enrolment increased over the 2000-2010 period, though universal
primary education is yet to be reached. Pre-primary enrolment remains particularly
low (7 per cent). The gross enrolment ratio for primary level was 122 per cent in
2010/2011, indicating that Sierra Leone in principle could accommodate all students
at the appropriate grade for age. However, 23 per cent of children remain out of
__________________
1
2
3
4
5

Sierra Leone Budget Profile, 2014.
Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey, 2011.
Demographic and Health Survey, 2013.
Ibid.
UNAIDS, Population Size Estimation of Key Populations: Sierra Leone, August 2013.

3/12

school, and the primary completion rate is just 76 per cent. Household wealth explains
the most serious disparities in children’s enrolment. It is estimated that only 60 per
cent of children aged 6 to 11 years from the poorest households were enrolled in 2010,
against 93 per cent of children from the wealthiest households. Of the poorest group
only 76 per cent transition from primary school to junior secondary school, while
among the wealthiest children 96 per cent make the transition.
8.
Learning outcomes are generally very poor at all levels. At end of grade 3, many
children lack the most basic reading, writing and comprehension skills. Junior
secondary results are scarcely better. Inadequate pedagogical skills of teachers are a
serious obstacle to learning, with about 40 per cent of the teachers untrained and
unqualified. The demographic pressure on the education system is set to increase in
the near future, which calls for additional investments to increase the system ’s
capacity by 56 per cent in order to achieve universal primary education. 6
9.
Gender disparities in enrolment are slight, but they tend to deepen gradually as
children progress through school. Only 14 per cent of girls access senior secondary
school, against 32 per cent of boys. 7 Physical distance to secondary schools, early
marriage and teenage pregnancy hamper attendance by girls, especially at secondary
level.
10. About 16 per cent of girls are married before age 15 and 50 per cent before age
18. 8 Approximately 47 per cent of girls aged 18 have had a child or are pregnant. 9
Girls in the poorest quintile are more than four times as likely to give birth before age
15 compared to their peers in the wealthiest quintile. 10 Nine of ten women have
undergone female genital mutilation/cutting. 11
11. Weak protection systems, standards and capacity are major bottlenecks to
attaining a protective environment for women and children. Limited budge ts for social
welfare services, amounting to less than 1 per cent in national budgetary allocations
for 2014, 12 undermine the response capacity of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender
and Children’s Affairs and local councils. About 82 per cent of childre n aged 2-14 in
Sierra Leone are subjected to at least one form of psychological or physical
punishment. More than a quarter (26 per cent) of children aged 5 -17 are involved in
hazardous child labour. 13
12. Children in conflict with the law are routinely incarcerated with adults and
unable to realize their basic human rights. Victims of abuse have limited recourse to
justice or care and are traumatized. Weak civil registration systems reduce access to
birth registration. The response to child disability is poor, as school facilities are
largely inappropriate and there are no provisions to assist children with disability in
accessing health care and social protection.
13. There are difficulties with the availability and use of quality and reliable data to
provide evidence for decision-making in planning and programming. A
__________________
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

4/12

Government of Sierra Leone, Country Status Report, 2013.
Ibid.
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2010.
Demographic and Health Survey, 2008.
Multiple indicator cluster survey, 2010.
Demographic and Health Survey, 2013.
Government of Sierra Leone, Budget Estimates Profile, 2011-2015 (2013).
State of the World’s Children 2014.

comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework needs to be developed across
ministries, departments and agencies.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2013-2014
Key results achieved
14. UNICEF contributed to addressing identified barriers and bottlenecks that
prevent children, particularly the most disadvantaged, from realizing their rights.
Following is a summary of some of the major results achieved in the p revious
programme, which was a transition to the new four-year country programme:
15. The Free Health Care Initiative has significantly improved the availability of
essential drugs for management of childhood illnesses in health facilities and reduced
health care costs for women and children. UNICEF supported training, deployment
and supportive supervision of nurses, midwives, maternal and child health aides, and
community health workers. Rehabilitation, construction and equipping of health
clinics and hospitals was stepped up to improve quality. Twice yearly maternal and
child health weeks, which reached most households, included tracing of immunization
defaulters. Integrated community case management of malaria, pneumonia and
diarrhoea was scaled up from two to six districts, as was community-based
management of acute malnutrition.
16. Community-led total sanitation contributed to the reduction in open defecation.
During 2013, some 1,283 communities and villages, totalling 256,600 people, were
triggered for local action to stop open defecation. A total of 687 communities/villages,
with a population of 137,400 people, have been declared “open defecation free”.
17. UNICEF supported an increase in the number of peripheral health units
providing treatment for severe acute malnutrition from 227 to 428 nationwide. A total
of 32,000 children under 5 suffering from severe acute malnutrition were admitted
annually to the community-based management of acute malnutrition programme, with
an 80 per cent cure rate.
18. A strategic plan to speed up elimination of mother-to-child-transmission of HIV
is being implemented. It has improved access to services, upgraded facilities for early
infant diagnosis of HIV and scaled up paediatric care for affected children. The 12
district hospitals and 7 hospitals within the Western area provide early infant
diagnosis and paediatric treatment for infected children. Local organizations
supported by UNICEF provided care to 250 children infected by HIV.
19. UNICEF supported the Government in developing the education sector plan
(2014-2018) and national curriculum for basic education. Baseline research on early grade reading skills was completed, and the resulting findings were the basis for
developing the teacher training programme. Hygiene, health and sanitation have been
integrated into pre-service and in-service teacher training. UNICEF supported
households, mother support groups and schools through a cash and school uniform
incentive scheme to ensure that six-year-old children are enrolled in class 1.
20. UNICEF worked with the Government and partners to develop a national
strategy for reduction of teenage pregnancy, a child welfare policy and a child justice
strategy. UNICEF also supported adolescent mothers through life skills trainin g and

5/12

provision of funds for income-generating activities. It reached more than 6,000
adolescent girls through 200 clubs in 4 districts. UNICEF provided technical
assistance to develop and launch the national referral protocol for victims of gender based violence, including free medical examinations and training of stakeholders at
district and chiefdom level.
21. At community level, assistance has been provided to 102 child welfare
committees, 400 traditional and religious leaders, 202 paralegals and 171 community
groups to prevent and respond to child protection issues, such as diversion of children
and adolescents in conflict with the law from the formal judicial system, family
tracing and reunification of children not living with their biological parents. Family
tracing and reunification networks have been set up in 12 districts.
22. A social protection secretariat has been established with support from UNICEF
and the World Bank to coordinate implementation of a cash transfer programme for
extremely poor households.
Lessons learned
23. During the first decade after the war, UNICEF and other development partners
concentrated on immediate provision of basic social services. In recent years there
has been a shift towards supporting the Government and its partners to develop
capacity to provide such services to children and their families. Partnerships between
local councils and community structures have strengthened the capacity to undertake
monitoring and supervision of schools. Furthermore, pursuit of ch ild rights through
community-centred approaches to empowerment of women can be effective.
Community self-financing schemes play an important role in rallying community
groups and help in encouraging members to sustainably support various child care
activities.
24. To empower women and girls and reduce their vulnerabilities requires
collaboration among different programme components to increase access to services,
address harmful social practices and provide educational and economic opportunities
for women and girls.
25. With 56 per cent of the population under the age of 20, it is crucial to enable
children and adolescents to remain in school, make informed decisions and develop
coping and self-management skills that help them lead healthy and productive liv es.
26. In an environment of inadequate accountability and risk to resources, UNICEF,
the Government and other stakeholders developed a risk and control matrix to reduce
risks related to procurement and distribution of drugs for free health care. It impro ved
accountability and transparency.

The country programme, 2015-2018
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Child survival and development
Education

6/12

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

10 500

119 585

130 085

6 500

50 000

56 500

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child protection

5 000

20 000

25 000

Social policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation

6 780

8 000

14 780

External relations and advocacy

2 000

2 000

4 000

Cross-sectoral

5 000

6 000

11 000

Total

35 780

205 585

241 365

Preparation process
27. The country programme has been developed through a participatory process
involving government partners under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development. The process was informed by the situation analysis, common
country assessment and review of the United Nations transitional joint vision (2013 2014). The programme builds on the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2015-2018 to support implementation of the Agenda for
Prosperity and sectoral policies. The country office held a Strategic Moment of
Reflection in December 2013 to review UNICEF roles and engagement in the country.
Consultations were held with counterparts, civil society organizations, donors and
experts.
28. This participatory preparation process focused especially on equity, adolescent
behaviour and opportunities, empowerment of women, social inclusion, results -based
management and the human rights-based approach to programming. Under the
authority of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, t he draft version of
the country programme was presented to all key partners for consideration and
amendments.
Programme components, results and strategies
29. The overall goal of the country programme for 2015 -2018 is to support national
efforts to accelerate the realization of the rights of children by improving access to
services, developing the capacity of systems, building resilience among households
and communities, and providing social protection to the poorest and most vulnerable
families. This is expected to significantly contribute to achievement of the post -2015
development goals. It also will support achievement of the global goals in the
UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017.
30. The programme strategies, emphasizing sectoral convergence, will include
(a) developing capacity for service delivery that is equitable and sensitive to conflict
issues, particularly for vulnerable groups such as children under ag e 5 in underserved
areas, children who are orphaned or living without their biological parents, children
with disabilities, children involved in child labour, adolescent girls and out -of-school
children; (b) strengthening systems for real-time programme monitoring and
evaluation; (c) building community resilience and empowerment through community centred development; (d) supporting upstream policy reforms, advocacy, institution building and decentralized planning and budgeting to ensure more responsive and
accountable service delivery; (e) collaborating with the private sector, communities,
civil society and governmental entities to leverage resources for realization of child

7/12

rights; (f) promoting behavioural and social change in households and communities
to enhance child survival, education and protection outcomes and build resilience; (g)
building emergency preparedness capacity and humanitarian response; (h) innovating
for better delivery of services; and (i) strengthening the role of zonal offices to support
engagement with decentralized structures, especially district and local councils.
31. Child survival and development. This programme component aims to ensure
that under-five and school-age children, adolescents and women have access to and
utilize essential, high-quality and high-impact child survival and development
services incorporating prevention, treatment and care.
32. Within the context of “A Promise Renewed”, the component will support policy
formulation and implementation of sector strategies for children, women and
adolescents, and contribute to data generation for informed decision -making and
programming. It will support implementation of the national health sector strategic
plan; the reproductive, newborn and child health policy; the strat egic plan for
elimination of mother-to-child-transmission of HIV; and the strategy for reduction of
teenage pregnancy. It will also support formulation of legislation to aid community
health workers and infant and young child feeding practices. The program me will
address bottlenecks in investment plans, institutional reforms and private sector
participation in water and sanitation interventions.
33. The component will continue capacity development by intensifying training for
health personnel and improving facilities to scale up and deliver better child, newborn
and maternal care. It will also support actions to increase access to quality adolescent
sexual and reproductive health care through youth-friendly services and linkage of
programmes with schools. Health facilities will be further renovated by installing
water and sanitation and scaling up outpatient therapeutic feeding centres. Separate
sanitation facilities for boys and girls will be established in primary schools.
34. Community-centred interventions will be aided to provide immediate postnatal
care; encourage use of insecticide-treated mosquito nets; treat malaria, pneumonia
and diarrhoea; prevent and manage HIV; screen for acute malnutrition; promote
appropriate infant and young child feeding practices; maintain “open defecation free”
status; promote key family practices, including hand washing with soap; maintain
water and sanitation facilities; and promote emergency preparedness, disaster risk
reduction and community resilience. The Child Survival and Development
Programme will ensure enhanced synergies and increased efficiencies in the delivery
of a package of integrated community level interventions including Health; Nutrition;
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene; and HIV/AIDS. The integration of the community
interventions will be ensured through the strengthening of existing community
structures and resilience mechanisms in a participatory manner, with the full
involvement of community members and both their traditional and administrative
leaders.
35. Education. This programme component will support development of
institutional capacity in the education sector, including by strengthening systems to
enhance school enrolment and right-age entry, retention, completion and transition,
as well as improved quality of teaching and learning. In line with the education sector
plan and the Global Partnership for Education, interventions will focus on
programming both in and out of school through support to school readiness,
mentoring programmes for girls and greater participation by parents and communities
in school management.

8/12

36. The component will support the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
in setting up an education management information system to measure learning
outcomes of all children, including those at risk of not accessing the formal school
system. The ministry and local councils will be supported to increase their capacity
to monitor learning outcomes through cluster monitoring, links to teacher training
institutions and technology innovations to improve teachers’ professionalism and
classroom-based learning in child-friendly environments.
37. The ministry will also be supported to facilitate reform of the teacher training
curriculum, help to make the teaching service commission operation al and provide
adequate teaching and learning materials. Intersectoral approaches will be adopted to
support development of life skills among children and young people as well as health
and rights awareness through education. Synergies among the formal sys tems and
catch-up classes for out-of-school and over-age children will be established to
increase learning opportunities for girls and young mothers. The programme will
explore innovative approaches to consolidating peace and building community
resilience.
38. Child protection. Through an inclusive and integrated child protection systems
approach, this programme component will increase national and decentralized
capacity to provide equitable access to child-friendly services that prevent and
respond to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect. This will be through (a) support
to implement key policies and laws, such as child welfare and alternative care
policies, the Child Rights Act 2007, the Sexual Offences Act 2012, the child justice
strategy and the national strategy for reduction of teenage pregnancy; and (b)
institutional capacity-building at national and decentralized levels to prevent and
respond to violence, abuse and exploitation, with a special focus on adolescent girls
and boys. This will include improved user-friendly recourse to justice for children in
contact with the law and strengthened integration of birth and civil registration
services at national, district and local levels.
39. Children, adolescents and communities will be empowered to re duce the
harmful consequences of social norms and practices. There will be a particular focus
on reducing child marriage, adolescent pregnancies, female genital
mutilation/cutting, gender-based violence and the worst forms of child labour. Social
change and family strengthening strategies will contribute to reduced violence,
exploitation and abuse. Innovative child participatory approaches and links between
formal systems across sectors will be used to strengthen community mechanisms such
as child welfare committees and adolescent clubs. The objective is to develop locally
appropriate solutions to challenges facing children and adolescents, including those
with disabilities.
40. Social policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation. This programme
component will strengthen the capacities of ministries, agencies and local councils
for planning, monitoring and evaluation, data management and social policy analysis
to reduce multidimensional child poverty and exclusion. Through the roll -out of the
Monitoring Results for Equity System, it will further strengthen the use of national
and decentralized planning and monitoring systems that aim to systematically identify
and reduce bottlenecks to equitable service delivery for children and women. It will
engage in high-quality research on gender issues, adolescents and children.
41. To generate evidence for action, the component will support implementation of
a national monitoring and evaluation plan and policy. It will strengthen the health and

9/12

education management information systems. It will also strengthen national data
collection efforts through support to the multiple-indicator cluster survey in 2015, the
post-enumeration survey of the census in 2015 and the Demographic and Health
Survey in 2018. Innovative approaches in using technology for development will be
employed to enhance real-time monitoring, social accountability and service
response.
42. The component will support the Ministry of Information and the Office of the
President to develop a communication for development strategy. The goal is to
strengthen community-driven dialogue to advance social change and ensure people
have appropriate knowledge and skills on health care, nutrition, education, child
protection and water, sanitation and hygiene education (WASH). Better community
partnerships and engagement with decentralized structures will be emphasized
through community-centred development.
43. The component will support local councils to strengthen their capacity for
improved community participation in evidence-based and equity-focused planning,
budgeting for children, coordination of service delivery and accountability. Local
councils, civil society and communities will be supported to expand use of
participatory community monitoring and accountability fr ameworks to increase
citizen demand for services and accountability of both rights -holders and dutybearers, emphasizing women and adolescents.
44. The national social protection system will be strengthened to effectively provide
social protection to the poorest and most vulnerable groups, including people with
disabilities. The national social protection secretariat will be supported to ensure
timely benefit payments, better monitoring, rigorous grievance redress and improved
management of information for decision-making. Poor people and their communities
will be empowered to demand accountability and transparency in delivery of services
by participating in the grievance redress mechanism with civil society organizations,
local councils, the national social protection secretariat and the anti-corruption
commission.
45. External relations and advocacy. This programme component will use
multiple channels — including social media, print media, television and radio — for
evidence-based advocacy on issues relating to the rights of children and women.
These channels will also be used to increase awareness among duty-bearers and
rights-holders. Efforts will be made to strengthen donor and National Committee
relations to increase resources to support realization of child rights. The programme
will work with local and international media to improve reporting on children and
women in accordance with international ethical standards.
46. Cross-sectoral. This component will cover management and operational
support to ensure effective and efficient implementation of the country programme.
It will support administration, financial management, information technology, human
resources management, security and supply and logistics.

10/12

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
47. The country programme has been developed based on the joint strategies of the
UNDAF 2015-2018. It aims to support the Agenda for Prosperity, emphasizing three
priority pillars: human development, social protection and women ’s empowerment.
The programme supports national priorities by contributing to six of the eight pillars
of the UNDAF.
Relationship to international priorities
48. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other human rights treaties.
It is aimed at accelerating the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, as
well as the goals and targets of the post-2015 development agenda. It is aligned to the
seven outcomes of the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017 and the Core Commitments
for Children in Humanitarian Action. The programme is also aligned with the
principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action
and the New Deal for engagement in fragile states (of which Sierra Leone is a pilot
country), to which both UNICEF and the Government are committed.
Major partnerships
49. To ensure more effective and efficient use of resources to address priorities for
children and women, UNICEF will continue to participate in development partnership
coordination; the steering committee for multi-donor budget support; Scaling Up
Nutrition; the inter-agency coordination committee for the GAVI Alliance; and the
country coordination mechanism for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.
50. UNICEF will continue to co-chair the education partners’ group, health
development partners’ group, WASH donor partners’ group and the national
monitoring and evaluation technical working group so that adequate attention is given
to issues concerning the rights of children and women.
51. To enable closer coordination of policy formulation and implementation of
social protection programmes, UNICEF will work with the national social protection
forum, social protection secretariat, the World Bank and other United Nations
agencies.
52. To increase public awareness and media capacity to report ethically on the rights
of children and women, key partnerships will be strengthened with Journalists for
Human Rights, the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists, Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, Children’s Forum Network, Youth and Child Advocacy
Network, Independent Media Commission and Media Alliance for Children.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
53. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development will serve as the national
coordinating body for the country programme. Line ministries will be responsible for
implementation and coordination of the respective programmes. Key indicators for
monitoring progress are detailed in the summary results matrix. An Integrated
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed to enhance monitoring and
evaluation. There will be an emphasis on strengthening government and partner

11/12

monitoring systems to track the status of key barriers and bottlenecks in real time
through the Monitoring Results for Equity System, as well as on knowledge
management to document results, lessons learned and best practices. Mid-year and
annual reviews of the programme components will be undertaken with the
Government, implementing partners and development partners. UNICEF will
participate in the United Nations country team and other inter-agency coordination
mechanisms and contribute to annual UNDAF reviews and the end-of-cycle
evaluation.

12/12

