Sri Lanka
Country programme document
2013-2017

The draft country programme document for Sri Lanka
(E/ICEF/2012/P/L.13) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2012 annual session (5-8 June
2012).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 14 September 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

6.2

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

17

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006-2007)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2008)
Primary school enrolment/attendance (% net, male/female, 2009)

21 a
../.., 29/11
39 b
95/96

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female, 2008)

93

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

91

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

92

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15–49 years of age, male/female, 2009)
Child labour (%, 5-14 years of age, male/female)

<0.1
..

Birth registration (%, under 5 years of age, 2006-2007)

97

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

97/97, 97/98, 97/98

GNI per capita (US$)

2290

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

99

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Stardards adopted in 2006.
b
The reported estimate is 39 deaths per 100,000 live births (2006 ), as presented in the Family
Health Bureau Annual Report, Ministry of Health, 2006-2007. The estimate of 39 deaths per
100,000 live births is also the 2006 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality Estimation
Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with independent
technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. For
more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Sri Lanka has a multi-ethnic and religiously diverse population of nearly 21
million. It is ranked 97th out of 183 countries on the Human Development Index
(2011), a result achieved in large measure by the provision, since 1948, of free and
compulsory universal education up to age 14, free health services and several
poverty alleviation schemes.
2.
Following the May 2009 end of the conflict of almost three decades and
recovery from the tsunami devastation of 2004, the country is ready to take
advantage of emerging opportunities for durable peace with sustained and equitable
growth. The country is increasingly investing in economically lagging areas to
reduce regional disparities. It encourages more equitable development towards
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals through the national plan ‘A
Ten-Year Horizon Development Framework: Mahinda Chinthanaya: Towards a New
Sri Lanka, 2006-2016’ (referred to here as the Ten-Year Development Plan 20062016). Prevailing peaceful conditions contribute to fre e mobility within the country,
facilitating economic and social integration.

2

3.
Sri Lanka achieved lower middle income status in 2009, with a per capita GDP
of $2,400, and recorded 8 per cent economic growth in 2011. 1 In relation to
Millennium Development Goal 1, the rate of poverty fell from nearly 23 per cent in
2002 to 8.9 per cent in 2009/10, excluding three districts in the north where the
survey was not completed, as information needed was not available due to the high
movement of the population immediately after the cessation of the conflict. The
incidence of poverty ranges from 3.6 per cent in Colombo district in the Western
Province to 20.3 per cent in Batticaloa district in the Eastern Province. The Gini
coefficient for household income increased from 0.47 in 2006/2007 to 0.49 in
2009/2010, indicating a skewed income distribution. 2
4.
Sri Lanka is on track to achieve Millennium Development Goal 2 (universal
primary education) and Goal 3 (gender equality). It has a total adult literacy rate of
91 per cent. The country has achieved near-universal primary school enrolment of
99 per cent, which varies little across provinces or by gender. The retention rate to
last primary grade is 98 per cent, and the secondary gross enrolment ratio is 86 for
males and 88 for females. Yet the quality of education requires attention, as the pass
rate for grade 5 exams averages just 57 per cent. 3
5.
The current unemployment rate is less than 5 per cent (males, 2.9 per cent;
females, 7.1 per cent). 4 The Government has provided vocational and technical
training facilities to help young people develop marketable skills. However, a
substantial proportion of youth have limited opportunities for skills development.
6.
Sri Lanka is also on track to achieve Millennium Development Goal 4 (child
mortality), Goal 5 (maternal health) and Goal 6 (HIV/AIDS, malaria and other
diseases). The under-five mortality rate is 15 deaths per 1,000 live births and the
infant mortality rate is 13 deaths per 1,000 live births (2009). Almost all deliv eries
(98 per cent) are attended by skilled personnel, and the maternal mortality ratio is
33.4 per 100,000 births (2008). 5 Regional disparities in maternal mortality remain a
challenge; the highest-performing district (Polonnaruwa, in the North Central
province) has 14.4 per 100,000 live births while in the lowest performing (Mannar,
in the Northern province) it is 66.9 per 100,000 live births. The success in reducing
child mortality is matched by near-universal immunization coverage. The estimated
HIV prevalence rate for the age group 15-49 is low, at less than 0.1.
7.
Child nutrition is not on track to reach the Millennium Development Goal
target by 2015. Low birth weight afflicts 17 per cent of babies, and one sixth of
women have low body mass index. The percentage of underweight children below
the age of 5 has been reduced nationally from 34 per cent in 1987 to 21 per cent in
2006/07. However, the percentage varies across districts, from 12 per cent in
Gampaha (Western province) to 33 per cent in Badulla (Uva province). In other
nutrition indicators, 19 per cent of children under 5 years are stunted, varying from
8 per cent in Colombo to 41 per cent in Nuwara Eliya in the plantation areas. 6
__________________
1
2
3
4
5

6

Central Bank Annual Report, 2010.
Household Income Survey, Department of Census, 2009/10.
Annual Statistical Abstracts, 2011, Department of Census.

Central Bank Annual Report, 2010.

Annual Report of the Family Health Bureau, Ministry of Health, 2008. The data provided in the
UNICEF database is averaged over time, whereas the information from the Government is for
the year 2008 only.
Demographic and Health Survey 2006/2007, Department of Census.

3

8.
Sri Lanka is on track to achieve Millennium Development Goal 7
(environmental sustainability). It has achieved estimated national coverage of 90 per
cent for water supply and 91 per cent for access to sanitation, though these high
national figures mask disparities across the country. 7 Water quality remains an issue,
as does sustaining groundwater levels and reducing salinization.
9.
The country has made many gains for children, though promotion of child
protection rights requires further attention. Child protection legislation, policies and
standards exist, but they need to be fully operationalized in line with the
international treaties to which Sri Lanka is a signatory. Psychosocial, probation,
child care and social welfare services require strengthening in terms of human and
financial resources. More collaboration is needed between the Department of Social
Services and the Department of Probation and Child Care Services to generate
multi-sectoral community-based responses for children and their families.
10. Ongoing child protection issues include the number of children in residential
care, violence and abuse against children, the low age (8 years) of criminal
responsibility and the long average time it takes for courts to deal with abuse cases.
Children left behind by parents migrating for employment remains a con cern.
11. In the areas formerly affected by conflict, the civil administration, the justice
system and the police require further strengthening. Individuals and communities in
these areas also continue to face threats from land mines and other explosive
remnants of war. Post-conflict recovery and rehabilitation efforts, under way since
2009, address the basic needs of displaced communities. The promotion of
livelihood and other welfare activities for communities in the former conflict areas
are led by the Government in partnership with the United Nations and other
stakeholders. This support ranges from provision of education, health, water,
sanitation, shelter and demining services to strengthening administrative and social
service networks, developing road networks, rehabilitation and reintegration of excombatants, and livelihood improvement.
12. Populations in areas affected by the former conflict, in remote rural areas and
in the tea plantation sector are especially vulnerable. This indicates the need fo r
effective targeted interventions through decentralized planning and resource
allocation.
13. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to environmental degradation, natural hazards and
climate change. In late 2010, heavy rainfall — the worst in 100 years — caused
floods and landslides affecting more than 1.2 million people, mostly in Eastern,
Central, North Central and Northern provinces. Environmental risk management and
mitigation need improvement at national and decentralized levels.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2012
Key results achieved
14. The current programme has predominantly addressed the multiple needs of
populations affected by the tsunami and the conflict, but it also provided policy
__________________
7

4

Household Income Survey, Department of Census, 2009/10.

support to partners and services for resettled populations and residents of other
economically lagging areas.
15. The child-friendly school approach to improve school access and quality has
been institutionalized by the Ministry of Education. Rural water supply units have
been established in 17 of 25 districts to improve water management. Children were
reunified with their families through family tracing and reunification, as well as the
establishment of gatekeeping mechanisms, such as social support, income generating activities and cash grants, which prevented and protected children at high
risk of being separated from their families. Implementation of the Fit Person Order,
enabling provision of foster care, aided in deinstitutionalizing children. Social care
centres were established to provide coordinated and comprehensive child care
services.
16. In an effort to address the root causes of malnutrition, UNICEF supported the
development and adoption of a national nutrition policy in 2010 and the introduction
of an infant and young child feeding package. Successful advocacy contributed to
the establishment in January 2011 of a National Nutrition Council headed by the
President, and UNICEF is supporting a related nutrition secretariat. A multi -sectoral
approach to address nutritionally-at-risk households is being modeled in two
provinces. In four districts a marginal budgeting for bottlenecks analysis for the
health sector was conducted on a pilot basis to assess investment directions.
17. An inclusive-education policy was supported to improve rates of enrolment
and school completion. A policy for water quality surveillance and testing was
supported, and a sanitation policy is being drafted. Contributions were made for the
first draft of the Children’s Judicial Protection Act, national guide lines on case
management, a model orphanage ordinance and redirection of minor child offences
from criminalization to mediation.
18. Immediately after the conflict ended UNICEF supported the new internally
displaced students aged 5-14 years to attend school within the first six weeks of
displacement. Water and sanitation were provided to about 280,000 displaced
persons in welfare centres and to resettling populations. Severely undernourished
children who were internally displaced were provided with therape utic feeding,
significantly reducing under-nutrition prevalence. Children released by armed
groups were provided with reintegration support. The Office of the Commissioner
General for Rehabilitation was supported during development of a new emergency
regulation for children affected by armed conflict to provide the legal framework to
protect child surrendees from prosecution and to guarantee rehabilitation and
reintegration into society for children formerly associated with armed forces and
armed groups.
19. The programme supported government officials at central and provincial levels
to strengthen their skills and capacity in planning, monitoring and evaluation and to
improve quality and timeliness of routine data collection. Micro -level planning and
monitoring mechanisms were supported to reduce inequities at the divisional level.
The population census of 2012, the first covering the entire country since 1981, was
also supported.

5

Lessons learned
20. Reviews showed that policies are often well developed but inadequately
implemented and monitored. Additionally, variability in capacities among service
providers undermines effective implementation. This underlines the importance of
strengthening the capacities of provincial authorities and enhancing devol ved
functions in education, child protection, health, planning, monitoring and budget
tracking for equitable service delivery.
21. Lessons drawn from experience in planning for emergency preparedness,
relief, recovery and early-development interventions, and from the tsunami and the
conflict, highlighted the importance of balancing between investments in assets and
infrastructure and in longer-term capacity strengthening.
22. Analysis of previous conflicts in Sri Lanka suggests that disenfranchised and
unemployed youth have often been main drivers of conflicts. To contribute to
reconciliation and lasting peace, the partnerships with government and development
partners need strengthening to ensure that children and youth are respected and
protected and receive help to fulfil their rights and respond to their aspirations.

The country programme, 2013-2017
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

1 560

23 435

24 995

Young people’s protection, empowerment and
participation

935

14 060

14 995

Policies and advocacy for a caring society and
equitable development

625

9 375

10 000

Cross-sectoral

630

9 380

10 010

3 750

56 250

60 000

Programme component

Disparity reduction and equitable, high-quality
social services

Total

Additional funds for emergency response will be raised if necessary.

Preparation process
23. The preparation of this CPD benefited greatly from the consultative process to
develop the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), which
included a desk review of relevant secondary data and literature. In lieu of a
comprehensive situation analysis, several studies informed the CPD. These included
the government’s 2011 household income and expenditure survey, t he 2010
UNICEF-Ministry of Health food and nutrition survey, and the updated UNICEF
2011 study on child well-being.
24. Additionally, UNICEF conducted a series of brainstorming exercises to
identify its comparative advantages as the organization repositio ns itself from
emergency to development engagement in a middle-income country. Local

6

stakeholders, including senior government officials, civil society organizations,
academics and youth representatives, were consulted on challenges and options for
Sri Lankan children and youth in the changed country context.
25. The development of this CPD was further guided by the Ten -Year
Development Plan 2006-2016, provincial development plans, national and district
studies, and the findings of the 2010 midterm review.
Programme components, results and strategies
26. The overall goal of the 2013-2017 country programme is to support fulfilment
of the rights of children, youth and women to a protective environment, equitable
development and inclusive high-quality social services. By maximizing the peace
dividend, the programme also aims to promote a caring society with fewer inequities
and lasting peace. In this light, the programme will focus on underserved and
vulnerable groups living mainly in remote rural areas, area s formerly affected by
conflict and the plantation sector, as identified in the country’s Ten -Year
Development Plan 2006-2016.
27. All three programme components will make use of a variety of strategies under
the human rights-based approach:
(a) Capacity development will be realized through strengthening of national
and provincial systems and authorities to improve efficiency and effectiveness in
planning and resource allocation. Disaster preparedness and risk management will
be improved across all components;
(b) Service delivery will be reinforced to fill gaps and improve access to and
quality of services across all programmes. The emphasis will be on reducing under nutrition, improving education quality and promoting community child protection;
(c) Strategic partnerships will be established with government authorities,
the private sector, civil society, development partners and the United Nations
system, using a rights-based approach to policy formulation and implementation.
Complementary approaches will be sought in order to benefit from efficiencies in
delivery;
(d) Advocacy will promote required changes in programmatic interventions.
Advocacy and partnerships will be strengthened to leverage resources to fulfil the
rights of children and women in the context of a middle-income country.
(e) Communication for development will be used to promote best practices
and behavioural changes in the community to sustain interventions. It will be
employed to increase the participation of young people in decision-making
processes, both within their homes and as citizens of the country. The objective is to
enable them to express their opinions broadly with a view to increasing well -being
and empowerment.
(f) Knowledge management will be employed to identify current and
emerging challenges and to support informed decision-making and evidence-based
policymaking. This will include scaling up proven interventions to reduce
inequities.
28. Though gender parity has been achieved in all social indicators, all three
programme components will contribute to sustaining gender equality. Environmental

7

sustainability is addressed through water and sanitation initiatives as well as disaster
and risk reduction advocacy through schools. Environmental sustainability will be
incorporated into the capacity development and advocacy strategies to encourage
guardianship of the environment by the next generation.
Programme components
29. Disparity reduction and equitable, high-quality social services. This
programme component will contribute to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and the results outlined in the medium-term strategic plan, and to fulfil the
commitments of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It will be implemented
mainly through the public sector and will aim to strengthen capacities and service
delivery to support survival and development of children, quality education, a
protected environment and adequate water and sanitation facilities. The component
will emphasize equitable access to services by underserved people. Special attention
will be paid to improving behavioural changes in communities using existing best
practices. It comprises four sub-components designed to be implemented in a
targeted and mutually reinforcing manner for maximum impact:
(a) The nutrition and health sub-component aims to improve the
nutritional status of pregnant and lactating women, children and adolescents,
through improved food and nutrition policies and related practices. Micronutrient
supplementation will be strengthened by improving service delivery in lowerperforming areas. Major emphasis will be given to providing malnourished groups
with a selected package of high-impact and cost-effective interventions across
sectors to reach the most nutritionally at-risk groups, such as poor people and
residents of the estate sector. Quality health care services will be strengthened to
reduce neonatal mortality and improve early childhood care and development.
Continued attention will be paid to emergency preparedness and access to health and
nutrition services during emergencies. Attention will also be paid to enhancing risk
communication, where messages are communicated to parents/clients in low coverage areas that the benefits of immunization outweigh the rare risk associated
with immunization. Attention will also be paid to eliminating new HIV infections
among children and mothers;
(b) The objective of the education sub-component is to improve levels of
pre-primary enrollment, retention and completion up to at least grade 9 in u nderperforming districts and to improve learning outcomes. UNICEF will be an active
partner in ongoing curricula reform efforts. Preschool learning will be improved
with quality teaching and support to social cohesion, peace education and higher
rates of school attendance. School-based management and development plans for
disaster risk reduction will also be promoted;
(c) The child protection sub-component will work to improve the quality
of social welfare services by supporting more effective targeting o f vulnerable
children and their families. It will also strengthen prevention of and response to
violence and abuse and support family preservation, in line with the Concluding
Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child following submission of
the Sri Lanka state report in 2010. Support will focus on alternative care reforms,
including prevention of family separation and family-based care and
deinstitutionalization; psychosocial well-being of the most vulnerable children and
families; access to effective and coordinated services for vulnerable groups such as

8

children with disabilities; children affected by migration, substance abuse or
HIV/AIDS; children at risk or victims of violence, abuse or exploitation; and
children needing protection in emergencies. With these interventions, systems will
be strengthened to provide such services more efficiently;
(d) The water, sanitation and hygiene sub-component aims to ensure the
sustainable use of improved water supply and adequate sanitation services. It will
work to help strengthen the government’s community water supply and sanitation
division and the groundwater study group at national and subnational levels. This
support will also help to stop the deterioration of water quality, dropping water
tables and seasonality of water supply. Hygiene education through health and
education services will also be promoted along with adequate water and sanitation
facilities. This sub-component will be coordinated with the Nutrition and Health,
Education and Child Protection sub-components in implementing cost-effective
interventions targeting underserved groups. It will also address equity issues along
with strengthened coordination during emergencies.
30. Young people’s protection, empowerment and participation. This
programme component aims to improve the capacities of service providers and
address gaps in service delivery, contributing to a protective environment for
children and adolescents. Vocational training opportunities will be supported and
linkages encouraged with the private sector to strengthen young people’s marketable
skills and to build participation and support for economic and social empowerment.
31. The objective is to protect, respect and fulfil the rights of all young people —
boys and girls — in accordance with their evolving capacities. They will be
supported to acquire the marketable and employable skills, values and experience
needed to negotiate multiple life domains. They will be helped to become
economically independent, to be protected from exploitation and abuse, and to avoid
risky behaviours. They will also be encouraged to participate in a positive way in
their families and communities. Support will be provided for young people’s life
skills training and access to education, health services and information of particular
interest to young people. This will enable them to make informed choices in life and
to avoid risks such as HIV and injuries from landmines and explosive remnants of
war.
32. Knowledge sharing and participation activities also offer important potential
for cross-community reconciliation. Advocacy in support of law reform will
concentrate on the care and protection of children in conflict with the law and child
victims of violence, abuse and exploitation. To further streng then the juvenile
justice system, the Government will be supported to redirect children in conflict
with the law, for example for minor theft infractions, to the Mediation board and to
develop additional court diversion models for other minor crimes. Effec tive and
timely expediting of cases concerning violence, exploitation and abuse of children
requires also strengthening.
33. Policies and advocacy for a caring society and equitable development. This
programme component will contribute to more effective a nd efficient resource
allocations and interventions, focusing on improving the well -being of vulnerable
and underserved groups. Its objective is to contribute to system building through
social policy and balanced regional development. Capacities of local b odies will be
reinforced for evidence-based planning and resource allocation to improve the
efficiency of service delivery for underserved groups. Towards this result, the

9

quality and timely availability of routine disaggregated data will also be
strengthened with systems to track child-related budgets and results. Such evidence
will inform advocacy and development of public/private partnerships.
34. Advocacy will be undertaken and partnerships strengthened and developed to
increase awareness and protection of children’s rights. Advocacy and partnership
building will also be critical for supporting resource mobilization, which is vital for
reaching the planned results. In addition disaster and climate risk management will
be supported. The objective is to strengthen the capacity of government and its
partners to minimize the effects of climate change, environmental degradation and
disasters.
35. Cross-sectoral. The cross-sectoral programme component will cover
coordination and management of the country programme in the country and zone
offices, including logistics, communication, planning and monitoring and
evaluation.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
36. The goals of the Ten-Year Development Plan 2006-2016 are that every Sri
Lankan family will enjoy decent and healthy living conditions in a culturally
vibrant, multilingual, environmentally sustainable and economically productive
nation. It identifies three central areas of focus: achieving more equitable
development; accelerating growth; and strengthening public service delivery. A
national plan for a trilingual Sri Lanka is being implemented to support
reconciliation.
37. The 2013-2017 UNDAF will contribute to the country’s Ten-Year
Development Plan 2006-2016, emphasizing equitable economic and social
development in support of a caring society. The development plan addresses the
conflict-affected areas as well as socially and economically deprived areas of the
country.
38. The four main pillars of the 2013-2017 UNDAF are: (a) equitable economic
growth and sustainable livelihoods; (b) disparity reduction and equitable and quality
social services; (c) governance, human rights, gender equality, social inclusion and
protection; and (d) environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster risk
reduction. The UNICEF 2013-2017 CPD results will contribute to achievement of
all four of these themes.
Relationship to international priorities
39. This country programme will be in line with the UNDAF and the national
priorities, both of which are designed to assist Sri Lanka in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals with equity while pursuing a lasting peace. The
country programme will contribute to achieving results in all focus areas of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan. It supports implementation of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and their Optional Protocols, and in particular the
Concluding Observations and Recommendations of the respective co mmittees of the
conventions in response to the State reports.

10

Major partnerships
40. UNICEF will continue to nurture strong partnerships formed during the
previous country programmes with key government ministries, provincial
authorities, development partners and civil society organizations at subnational
levels. It will also develop new alliances with the private sector. The sector
coordination mechanisms will be maintained to assist in times of emergency and
natural disasters.
41. With the end of the conflict and the attainment of lower middle income status
in 2009, support from traditional donors has been significantly reduced. Fundraising
efforts will be further intensified and will focus more on leveraging resources from
public-private partnerships. Furthermore, funding availability should improve with
better evidence-based planning and implementation along with more targeted use of
existing resources.
42. Advocacy, communication and new partnerships will promote and protect
rights, leading to higher priority for children, youth and women in national policies
and plans. Parliamentarians, civil society, non-governmental organizations and think
tanks will be engaged, as well as domestic and international news organizations.
Existing and prospective partnerships with donors and resource providers will be
nurtured and strengthened. Sustained visibility of UNICEF will play an important
role in securing new partners and mobilizing resources. Partnerships with United
Nations sister agencies will be reinforced through the UNDAF and the United
Nations country team. This will support joint programming, collective advocacy and
leveraging of resources. In addition, collaboration will continue with experts and
academics from universities and research organizations, both state and private, for
the purpose of generating knowledge for evidence-based advocacy.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
43. Key monitoring indicators are set out in the summary results matrix, which
will provide the basis for the five-year database for the Integrated Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan. It will be consistent with the monitoring and evaluation plan of the
UNDAF.
44. Results-based programme management is vital to improve equity and social
cohesion. The programme will work with all partners to reinforce routine collection
of gender-disaggregated data and to develop capacities in data and bottleneck
analysis. Collaboration with other partners, especially the Department of Census,
will build on the nationwide population and housing census of March 2012.
Information from this census will help to identify the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged groups and will inform the targeting of UNICEF interventions in the
pursuit of social equity.
45. UNICEF will support the conduct of selected studies to address evolving and
emerging issues. Surveys will be conducted jointly with stakeholders and a steering
committee of government partners, practitioners and academics from universities
and research institutions.
46. The Ministry of Finance and Planning takes the lead in joint monitoring of
programme implementation with relevant stakeholders. The country programme will
be monitored at different levels in the country, during annual UNDAF and UNICEF
reviews with the Government and also with other stakeholders, some of whom

11

conduct reviews twice yearly at central and provincial levels. Monitoring of the
Millennium Development Goals is conducted by the Government as part of its
national development strategy, and UNICEF will liaise with and supp ort the
Department of Census and Statistics.

12

