Republic of South Sudan
Country programme document
2012-2013

The draft country programme (CPD) document for the
Republic of South Sudan (E/ICEF/2012/P/L.1 and Corr.1) was
approved in accordance with decision 2011/16, on an exceptional
basis, by the Executive Board at its 2012 first regular session (7-10
February 2012).
The draft CPD was discussed at an informal consultation on
19 December 2011 and subsequently revised. This final version was
approved at the 2012 first regular session of the Executive Board on
10 February 2012.

†

Basic data
(2010 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

4.3 a

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

125 a

Underweight* (%, moderate and severe)
(urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported, 2004 -2006)
Primary school attendance (%, net male/female)

28
..
2 054 b
32/25

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2009)

26 c

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

69

Use of adequate sanitation facilities (%)

13 d

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

3.2

Child labour (%, 5-14 year olds)

..

Birth registration (%, under 5 years)

..

(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

..

GNI per capita (US$)

984

One year olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

13 e

One year olds immunized against measles (%)

20 e

†

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
* Underweight estimates are based on the WHO Child Growth Standards adopted in 2006.
a
Unofficial estimates from the United Nations Population Division.
b
This maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is the reported estimate for Southern Sudan from the
2006 Sudan Household Health Survey (SHHS) and pertains to the years 2004-2006. This
estimate should be interpreted with caution, as data collection did not follow standard
procedures and thus may be subject to considerable non-sampling in addition to sampling
error. An adjusted United Nations inter-agency MMR estimate for South Sudan has not been
calculated yet.
c
This estimate reflects survival to the last grade of primary school as defined by the International
Standard Classification of Education (ISCED), which includes primary grades 1-6. Using the
national definition of primary school (grades 1-8), the survival estimate drops to 8%.
d
This estimate represents the use of improved types of sanitation facilities, which includes
the use of shared facilities of an improved type as per the government definition of access.
This is different from the Millennium Development Goals definition, which excludes the
users of shared sanitation facilities from its estimates. Doing so would lower coverage
estimates for the use of improved sanitation facilities to 7%.
e
These estimates of immunization coverage are from preliminary household survey data. The
country-reported data suggest higher levels of coverage.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
The Republic of South Sudan was established on 9 July 2011, after more than
five decades of near continuous war that displaced about 4 million people, disrupted
socio-economic services and systems, and imposed a heavy toll on the survival and
well-being of the South Sudanese population, especially children. The 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) had enabled a period of relative stability
with an Interim Constitution providing the basis for future State building. Following
a near-universal vote in favour of secession in the referendum of January 2011, the
National Legislative Assembly was reconstituted and a new Government was

2

formed, committed to forging national unity among its diverse population of over
8 million people, comprising over 60 tribes speaking as many languages.
2.
The new republic faces many challenges. Some critical provisions of the CPA
have not been implemented and continue to cause tensions with Sudan. Since
October 2010, over 350,000 South Sudanese have returned home; around 300,000
people were displaced due to conflict in 2011. Children in South S udan are exposed
to an environment prone to conflict, ignited by communal strife over access to land,
grazing grounds and water sources. Decades of armed conflict have affected cultural
values and norms, led to widespread possession of small arms, weakened
community-based systems and resulted in inadequate institutions for conflict
resolution and diminished economic opportunities.
3.
Despite a gross national income (GNI) per capita of $984, over half (51 per
cent) of the population 1 survives under the poverty line, among which 93 per cent
live in rural areas. High levels of disparity are evidenced by a Gini coefficient of
0.455. Over one third of the population is food insecure and 56 per cent has suffered
from drought or floods over the last 5 years. The oil sector generates 98 per cent of
government revenue but little employment or revenue for average households.
4.
The 2010 Household and Health Survey (HHS) showed considerable
improvements in the situation of children during the period 2006 -2010. Infant and
under-five mortality rates decreased during that period, down from 102 to 84 per
1,000 live births and 135 to 106 per 1,000 live births, respectively, while recorded
measles cases decreased from nearly 2,000 to below 100. South Sudan has been
polio free since 2009. The proportion of pregnant women receiving at least two
doses of tetanus toxoid vaccine increased from 22 per cent to 50 per cent. Stunting
rates dropped from 33.4 per cent to 25 per cent. Primary school enrolment numbers
rose from 0.8 million to 1.4 million and secondary education from 15,000 to over
44,000 over the same period. Access to improved sources of drinking water
increased from 48.3 per cent to 68.7 per cent and to improved sanitation facilities
from 6.4 per cent to 12.7 per cent.
5.
South Sudan has the highest global burden of dracunculiasis, despite the
significant progress that has been made, reducing the 2006 caseload of over 20,500
to below 1,000 in 2011.
6.
The maternal mortality rate is the highest in the world, reaching 2,054 per
100,000 live births, with only 14.7 per cent of women delivering with the help of
skilled attendants. Birth registration is low, only 5.8 per cent of children are fully
immunized and malnutrition remains above the emergency threshold. Nationwide
HIV/AIDS prevalence is estimated at 3 per cent among pregnant women.
7.
Close to 1,250,000 children eligible for primary school do not have access,
with many existing schools not conducive to learning. Only 45 per cent of the 3,349
primary schools in South Sudan have access to safe water, and only 17 per cent have
adequate latrines for both girls and boys.

__________________
1

Poverty in South Sudan — Estimates from National Baseline Household Survey (NBHS) 2009 —
Southern Sudan Centre for Census Statistics and Evaluation.

3

8.
Children face a multitude of risks, such as abductions, early marriage,
recruitment into armed groups, violence, separation from families, and unexploded
ordinance. Thousands of children are orphans and lack appropriate care. Inadequate
education and job opportunities fuel youth involvement in conflicts.
9.
South Sudan likely has the biggest capacity gap in Africa. Only 13 per cent of
primary schools provide the full complement of grade 1-8, and the qualified teacherto-pupil ratio is 1:117. The doctor-population ratio is roughly 1:80,000; there are
only 12 qualified midwives for 340,000 women who give birth every year. The
severe deficiencies of capacity and infrastructure are noted across all sectors,
including access to markets and the provision of law and order.
10. The Republic of South Sudan presents a unique State-building challenge that
cannot be addressed as a classic transition or post-conflict recovery situation.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2009-2011
Key results
11. UNICEF supported the Accelerated Child Survival Initiative in 7 out of
10 States with vaccines, vitamin A capsules and communication materials, whereby
555,000 children under the age of five accessed primary health care services
targeting malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea. UNICEF assistance was complemented
by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). These joint efforts resulted in significant
progress in combating measles and polio. Over 45 per cent of estimated severely
malnourished children were treated annually at stabilization centres and outpatient
treatment programmes through UNICEF support. UNICEF contributed to the
development of the 2010-2012 Health and Nutrition Sector Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework and the establishment of a Health Management Information
System in 5 out of 10 States. Technical support for the formulation of standards
included prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV/AIDS
guidelines to enhance routine testing of pregnant women at antenatal care (ANC),
contributing to acceptance of the service by 65 per cent of pregnant women visiting
ANC sites offering it.
12. UNICEF leadership, technical assistance and partnership with other
stakeholders resulted in the successful “Go to School” campaign, credited with a
doubling in enrolment between 2005 and 2009. UNICEF assistance led to
improvements in the Education Management Information System providing data for
management and the payroll, and the initiation of ongoing programmes, such as life
skills education, education in emergencies, alternative education and girls’
education, which have continued to grow in scope and quality.
13. UNICEF support to construction and rehabilitation of water points and latrines
has resulted in increased access to drinking water for 600,000 and sanitation for
55,000 people, respectively. Joint action with the Carter Found ation, WHO and the
Ministry of Health has resulted in a reduction of dracunculiasis by 95.4 per cent
since 2006. Partnerships with Plan International and Population Services
International (PSI) have been developed for rapidly expanding community
sanitation and hygiene promotion activities. UNICEF has constructed 200 improved
water sources and 125 latrine blocks in primary schools and has reached about

4

1.7 million people with key hygiene messages. These combined interventions have
contributed to the decrease in the prevalence of diarrhoea from 44.2 per cent in 2006
to 32.4 per cent in 2010.
14. UNICEF advocacy and technical assistance resulted in the enactment of the
2008 Child Act — a significant milestone towards protecting and promoting the
rights of children in South Sudan. Nearly 250,000 community members, police and
social workers have been sensitized on the Child Act, contributing to ensuring child sensitive justice procedures to more than 3,000 children in contact with the law.
Over 800 children have been released from the Sudan People Liberation Army
(SPLA) following its signing of the Action Plan with the United Nations.
Community-based approaches have enabled close to 170,000 children and young
people affected by armed-conflict, violence, exploitation and abuse to benefit from
family tracing, reunification, and psychosocial care services, life skills and
vocational training.
15. The capacity of the South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in Juba
was strengthened to establish the South Sudan Info database, which is fully
functional and accessible online, allowing government and development partners to
monitor progress on development priorities, including the Millennium Development
Goals. The NBS further received UNICEF assistance in South Sudan in support of
the 2008 national population census, the 2009 household poverty survey and two
health household surveys resulting in the availability of data on social indicators to
inform planning and decision-making.
16. UNICEF has managed high expectations and challenges as cluster lead agency
for water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), nutrition, education and child protection,
requiring intense contingency planning and pre-positioning especially for the
referendum. This has been critical in ensuring a timely and children-focused
response to recent displacements of about 100,000 from the Abyei area, in managing
the transition of over 350,000 returnees, and the conflict -related displacement of
nearly a million people over the past three years.
Lessons learned
17. UNICEF future investment in capacity-building of public service provision
will need to be based on a systematic gap analysis, with an emphasis on the State
level. Nevertheless, the development of institutional capacity needs to be balanced
with consideration for the existing human resources scarcity. UNICEF will need to
increase interim measures, such as embedding technical assistance in ministries for
direct delivery, advisory services and coaching.
18. UNICEF support to information management systems (IMS) for social sectors
has been instrumental. Critical success factors included provision of comprehensive
support (training, funding, technical support and high-level advocacy); political
commitment and coordination of the Government; and a widely shared need for
credible data among the Government, donors and other partners. Sustainable
collection and utilization of data will require further emphasis on building capacity
within concerned ministries at the national level, and increase in support to IMS at
the State level.
19. UNICEF support to improvements in health, nutrition, WASH and education
service coverage has largely resulted from “campaign” modality, which will need to
continue as systems for delivery of basic services are taken to scale. I nputs to basic
service delivery and emergency response have been intensively supported by supply

5

assistance that amounted to a third of the total investments of $200 million made
over the past three years.

The country programme, 2012-2013
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
1.

Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health and nutrition

2 118

21 936

24 054

Water, sanitation and hygiene

1 128

17 420

18 548

Basic education and gender equality

1 128

18 494

19 622

Child protection

1 020

7 528

8 546

Policy advocacy and social protection

2 114

3 226

5 340

922

2 152

3 075

Cross-sectoral

2 106

17 204

19 311

Total

10 536

87 960

98 496

Strategic communication

Note: An estimated $50 million in emergency funding will be received in support of the
Humanitarian Appeal Process.

Preparation process
20. The country programme has been informed by four key building blocks:
(a) intensive UNICEF participation in national strategic planning exercises,
including the 2011-2013 South Sudan Development Plan (SSDP), health, education
and water and sanitation sector strategic plans; (b) the UNICEF Strategic Reflection
Exercise (SRE), which defined a medium and long-term strategic vision for
maximizing and sustaining results for children in South Sudan and identified key
initiatives and priorities required for the new country; (c) the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2012-2013; and (d) concluding
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the report for the
Sudan.
21. The above processes have included intensive consultations with key line
ministries, national commissions, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), United
Nations agencies and development partners. The SRE in particular dr ew on a series
of children and youth consultations, and a qualitative survey among external
stakeholders. The UNDAF and the CPD were also discussed in joint strategic
meetingsand all principles of greater efficiency, minimum transaction costs and results
focus were observed in development of the UNDAF and CPD.

Programme component results and strategies
22. This first country programme builds on gains made following the CPA and
responds to the unique requirements of the new country. It aims to lay the
foundation for rapid acceleration of sustainable delivery of services for children in
the new State, in realization of their rights. Special attention is paid to
vulnerabilities of children and women affected by conflict and emergencies and to

6

gender and geographical inequities. The situation of girls and young women will
receive particular attention through a focus on education, early marriage and
maternal mortality.
23.

By 2013, the following programme component results will be achieved:

(a) Infants, children, adolescents and pregnant women access life-saving,
high-impact health, nutrition and HIV/AIDS services;
(b) Sustained access to community-managed improved WASH services
contributes to a reduction of morbidity, a break in transmission of dracuncu liasis,
and peacebuilding;
(c) South Sudan is on course to achieve universal participation and increased
and equitable completion of quality primary education, with parity among boys and
girls;
(d) Children and adolescents, particularly those affected by conflict and
emergencies, access quality child welfare services in a strengthened protective
environment;
(e) Investment and social protection for children in their early years are
enhanced;
(f) Strategic partnerships and systems are fostered for behavi oural
development and community transformation to advance children’s rights;
(g) Programmes for children are adequately supported by effective
operational and logistical support functions.
24. The country programme strives to accompany the new nation in its
stabilization, transition and State-building efforts by striking the right balance
between humanitarian and development assistance. It recognizes the continuing
fragility in the country and the transitional needs between emergency, recovery and
development, and will build in the agility and flexibility necessary for programmes to
remain relevant.
25. The country programme strategy responds to key dimensions of the State building process and focuses on interventions that are transformative and at scale.
This includes (a) systems-building support to preventing and resolving conflict in
society (equitable and conflict-sensitive provision of health, education and water
services while strengthening justice and community protection systems for
children); (b) managing State revenue to meet people’s expectations (cash transfer
and basic service delivery); and (c) legitimizing the State in the eyes of the
population (strengthening State institutions and systems, engaging the community
and youth in critical processes, and monitoring performance).
26. UNICEF will maintain its strong capacity to deliver on the Core Commitments
for Children (CCCs) in Humanitarian Action, and its leadership in cluster
coordination. It will strive to mainstream minimum standards for eme rgencies into
government policies, plans and budgets, and strengthen partners’ accountabilities.
27. Initiatives around innovations and new technologies for development and
humanitarian action will be built into relevant programmes to improve access to
information, delivery of essential services and monitoring of services and the
situation of children.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF

7

28. The country programme is closely linked to the outcomes of the UNDAF
2012-2013, which is designed to put in place building blocks of statehood, in order
to tackle one of the most challenging development contexts in Africa. Through
initiatives that are transformative and at scale the United Nations will significantly
contribute to the SSDP and its four pillars. The UNICEF country programme will
contribute to all four UNDAF outcomes: (a) core governance and civil service
functions are established and operational; (b) chronic food insecurity is reduced and
household incomes increase; (c) key service deliver y systems are in place, laying
the groundwork for increased demand; and (d) violence is reduced and community
security improves
Relationship to international priorities
29. The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child embody the guiding principles for the country
programme. In addition, A World Fit for Children, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Millennium
Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals, as well as the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the CCCs in humanitarian action, have guided
the strategic focus on the priority programme components.
Programme components
30. The six programme components — health and nutrition; water, sanitation and
hygiene; basic education and gender equality; child protection; policy advocacy and
social protection; and strategic communication — will synergistically address the
core gaps in the rights of children. Interventions for addressing HIV/ AIDS,
peacebuilding, youth empowerment and humanitarian action will be integrated into
each of the programmes. Strategic convergence of programmes will be promoted
around schools.
31. UNICEF will continue to provide strong leadership for the nutrition,
education, WASH and child protection clusters. Focus will be on managing the
supply pipeline, coordination, performance reporting and ensuring that clusters are
effectively functioning at the State level to meet gaps in coverage and to respond in
a timely manner.
32. Health and nutrition. South Sudan is one of the riskiest places in the world
for women to get pregnant and children to be born. Even when children survive, the
high rates of acute malnutrition result in children being deprived of their capacity to
thrive optimally. The aim is to: (a) strengthen immunization systems and “reach
every county” for delivering an expanded package of services at the community
level; (b) enhance management of acute malnutrition and strengthen practices for
infant and young child feeding preventing undernutrition; (c) expand PMTCT and
treatment of paediatric HIV/AIDS in high-prevalence areas; (d) strengthen family
care practices through intense communication for development; (e) establish signal
functions for emergency obstetric and neonatal care, laying the foundation for
strengthening health facility systems and improving community responsiveness.
33. UNICEF will continue to support health systems strengthening through
bottleneck analysis, evidence-based planning and budgeting, promoting innovations
in service delivery strategies, in-service training for facility and community-based
health and nutrition professionals, and strengthening referral linkages.

8

34. The programme will be implemented by the Ministry of Health and NG Os
delivering health and nutrition services. There will be a strong collaboration with
the HIV/AIDS Commission. Technical assistance provided by the WHO and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) will contribute to the results related to
maternal and child health, and the World Food Programme (WFP) to nutrition.
35. Water, sanitation and hygiene. Limited access to water and sanitation has
contributed to poor child health and is frequently a trigger for local conflicts. Site
selection for WASH services will take into account factors reducing conflicts over
sharing of water resources to support peacebuilding.
36. The programme will aim to: (a) catalyse an increased allocation of funding
through investment plans aligned to a WASH Strategic Framework and the SSDP;
(b) strengthen the WASH Information Management System (WIMS), ensuring
smoother bidirectional data exchange among State-level information hubs and the
central WIMS unit; (c) establish sustainable supply chain systems to support longerterm water-point rehabilitation; (d) accelerate access to sanitary latrines and
promote hygienic behaviour practices; (e) develop recognition systems to stimulate
local sanitation innovations and mobilize individuals and communities to address
their own sanitation problems; and (f) improve WASH services for vulnerable
communities, schools and health centres.
37. The programme will be implemented by the Ministry of Water Resources and
Irrigation, in partnership with Plan International, PSI and the Netherlands
Development Cooperation (SNV). Partnership with county-level governments and
key WASH cluster actors will be emphasized.
38. Basic education and gender equality. South Sudan will require strategic
investment in primary education. The paucity of trained teachers, the poor
supervision and management, the overcrowded and inadequate learning facilities
means that little learning takes place, even for the 1.4 million children in school.
Girls are particularly deprived of their right to education.
39. Using a child-friendly approach, the programme will aim to: (a) finalize the
education act and policy; (b) strengthen the IMS at school and State levels;
(c) review the curricula and develop materials that include life skills education with
an HIV-AIDS component; (d) accelerate training of education managers, teachers
and parent-teacher associations; (e) accelerate access and retention of girls;
(f) undertake strategic school rehabilitation and construction; (g) provide greater
coverage of quality alternative education; and (h) provide protective education
services for girls and boys affected by humanitarian crisis.
40. Promising new partnerships will be pursued with the Fast Track Initiative
(FTI), the Association for the Development of Education in Africa, the Institute of
International Education and relevant education institutes. The programme will be
implemented by the Ministry of General Education and Instruction and the Ministry
of Culture, Youth, and Sports. A joint programme with the United Nations Office for
Project Services (UNOPS) managing school construction will continue.
41. Child protection. Children in South Sudan face multiple protection risks,
which mostly stem from decades of conflict that destroyed the social fabric of
communities and eroded the protective environment for children surrounded by
violence.
42. The programme will aim to: (a) develop policies, legislative frameworks and
child protection systems; (b) develop the civil registration system with emphasis on

9

birth registration; (c) promote a child-sensitive justice system with emphasis on
restorative justice; (d) scale-up community-based reintegration services for children
released from armed-groups, rescued from abduction and separated from their
families; (e) provide psychosocial and other services to children affected by
violence and HIV/AIDS; and (f) empower boys and girls against harmful traditional
practices, such as early marriage and abduction, through social transformation and
advocacy for child rights.
43. The programme will be implemented by the Ministries of Gender, Child and
Social Welfare; Justice; Interior; and the Commission for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration. Based on the recommendations of the Civilian
Capacity Review, a new collaboration with the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) is envisaged to contribute to the professional development of
relevant institutions.
44. Policy advocacy and social protection. In an oil producing country where the
majority of the population lives under the poverty line, allocations to the social
sector amount to only 9 per cent of the total national budget in 2011, with a highly
inequitable geographical distribution.
45. The programme will aim to: (a) generate quantitative and qualitative evidence
and deepen the knowledge of the situation of children in both development and
humanitarian contexts; (b) conduct strategic studies and research, including budget
analysis, and facilitate international knowledge networking for an evolving policy
environment; (c) strengthen South Sudan Info as a major repository and source of
key data for the country; (d) develop a social protection framework and set up a
child benefit cash transfer programme; (e) develop an effective accountability and
coordination framework among national humanitarian institutions; and (f) advocate
the creation of an independent child commission for the implementation of the Child
Act.
46. The programme will be implemented by the Ministry of Gender, Child and
Social Welfare and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, in collaboration
with other relevant ministries, the NBS and the Relief and Rehabilitation
Commission. Results will be achieved through collaboration with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNFPA, and WFP on data collection,
analysis and dissemination; UNDP and the World Bank on poverty reduction and
cash transfers; and the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations
Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance and other members of the
humanitarian country team on emergency preparedness and response.
47. Strategic communication. The communication environment in South Sudan is
extremely challenging with limited channels. Information and guidanc e are largely
delivered face-to-face by community and religious leaders, although increasingly
relayed by radio. Strategic partnerships to foster capacities for bottom -up
approaches to consultative and participatory communication with households and
communities will be the cornerstone of the programme, which will provide
sustainable platforms for positive behaviour development and community
transformation. Advocacy and communication for development strategies will draw
on evidence and consultation with children and communities.
48. The programme aims to: (a) provide access and knowledge to vulnerable
groups and households of life-saving information to maintain and protect their
families during emergencies; (b) establish communication systems for social

10

mobilization and interpersonal communication from State to community levels; (d)
strengthen capacity of civil service, media and NGOs at all levels to implement
communication interventions; (e) increase children and youth participation and
dialogue with decision makers; and (f) develop a national policy for guiding child
survival communication for development efforts.
49. UNICEF will forge strong partnerships — with the Ministries of Gender, Child
and Social Welfare; Health; General Education and Instruction; Cu lture, Youth, and
Sports; national commissions; faith-based organizations (FBOs); civil society
organizations; and media associations — to advance advocacy for child rights.
50. Cross-sectoral costs. The cost of programme delivery in South Sudan is very
high, driven by poor local markets for goods and services, inflation, mobility costs,
security compliance requirements and entitlements. The aim is to ensure that
programmes for children are adequately supported by effective human resources,
operational and logistical support functions, and, risk management. This is
particularly relevant for the management of a high volume of financial transactions
and an anticipated volume of close to 10,000 metric tonnes of supplies per year,
especially in execution of the humanitarian mandate.
Major partnerships
51. Collaboration with United Nations agencies will be at the core of the country
programme, in the context of the UNDAF, as well as with UNMISS in the area of
child protection, protection of civilians, and operations support. UNICEF will
participate in joint programmes on Youth, HIV/AIDS, and Education and Social
Protection. Further collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) will be sought in health and WASH in pastorali st and
peacebuilding contexts.
52. Private-sector involvement will be critical to achieving the results, including
banking and mobile phone service providers for cash transfers, birth registration,
and social communication. Strategic partnerships will be forged with regional
institutions, universities and research institutions for knowledge generation and
capacity development, local media and civil society, including FBOs, in critical
areas for advocacy and raising awareness. Cooperation with international media will
be key in placing issues of South Sudanese children on the international agenda.
53. A resource mobilization strategy will be developed to strengthen partnerships
with the National Committees for UNICEF; existing donors, (Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the European
Union); the World Bank and other emerging donors. UNICEF will continue to be
active in soliciting donor funding through the Common Humanitarian Fund, the
Central Emergency Relief Fund and other multi-donor pool funds.
54. Stand-by partner support for humanitarian action will continue to play an
important role, including the Norwegian Refugees Council, the Sw edish
Development Corporation, the Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs, and
Register of Engineers for Disaster Relief (REDR). Strategic partnerships for
effective operational and logistical support will be continued with the German
Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), UNHCR, WFP and IOM.
55. Within the framework of the SSDP and sector plans, UNICEF will support the
harmonization and alignment initiatives under way in the country, including the

11

National Aid Strategy, as well as global mechanisms su ch as the GAVI Alliance, the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and Roll Back Malaria.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
56. A two-year workplan will be developed, and annual reviews will be jointly
undertaken with the United Nations agencieswith unequivocal commitment to
Delivering as One. Programming for cross-sectoral priorities and convergence will be
strengthened through appropriate coordination structures.
57. UNICEF South Sudan has put in place an elaborate monitoring framework
aimed at providing accountability for implementation of programmes according to
the workplans, improving programme implementation and achievement of results by
responding to findings and recommendations of field monitoring missions and by
making use of surveys, studies and evaluations for effective planning and evidence based decision-making.
58. Managing the country programme in the current challenging situation will be
relying on a high level of flexibility and maintaining a decentralized presence in
10 States. UNICEF is actively addressing operational challenges, including high
costs and difficulty to attract qualified staff to work in South Sudan.
59. UNICEF will be closely involved in the development of the 2014 -2018 SSDP
and UNDAF, drawing additionally from the SRE, which reflected against a 2020
time horizon. Lessons will be drawn at the end of the current short cycle and the
possibility of a Common Country Programme Document will be assessed.

12

