E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Kingdom of Swaziland
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for the Kingdom of Swaziland is
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session,
on a no-objection basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of
$6,075,000 from regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and
$13,700,000 in other resources, subject to the availability of specific -purpose
contributions, for the period 2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

Programme rationale
1. The Kingdom of Swaziland is a small landlocked country with a population of 1.25
million, of whom over 48 per cent are under the age of 18 years. A gross national income of
$2,930 per capita places the country in the lower-middle-income category, although, at 2.8
per cent1 in 2013, the economic growth rate is among the lowest in the region. Slow growth
is attributed mainly to limited investment inflows and high dependence on a small number of
export commodities.
2. Despite its middle-income status, Swaziland continues to be characterized by high
levels of inequality, further exacerbated by the high burden of HIV and AIDS, which also
impacts child survival and development. While poverty levels decreased slightly between
2007 and 2010, from 69 to 63 per cent, they continue to remain high. Seventy per cent of
children live in poverty, rising to 80 per cent for children who have lost both parents.2
3. Swaziland is on track to achieve Millennium Development Goals 3 (promote gender
equality and empower women) and 6 (combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases).3
However, faster progress is required for Goals 1 (eradicate extreme poverty and hunger), 2
(achieve universal primary education), 4 (reduce child mortality), 5 (improve maternal
health) and 7 (ensure environmental sustainability).4 Under-five mortality is high at 67 deaths
per 1,000 live births,5 as is maternal mortality at 593 deaths per 100,000 live births.6 Three
quarters of under-five deaths occur during the first year of life, and babies who survive at
least one month account for three quarters of those in turn. The leading causes of under-five
mortality are neonatal deaths (30 per cent), HIV and AIDS (15 per cent), pneumonia (14 per
cent), diarrhoea (7 per cent) and injuries (4 per cent). 7 While some progress has been made
on birth registration, rates remain low at 50 per cent.
4. In Swaziland, 75 per cent of children aged 12–23 months are reported to be fully
immunized. The country has successfully introduced new vaccines to further contribute to
the reduction of vaccine-preventable diseases. Good results are reported in the areas of
antenatal care (76 per cent of pregnant women attend four antenatal visits) and skilled birth
attendance (88 per cent), as well as in eliminating new HIV infections in children, with only
2 per cent of infants age 6–8 weeks living with HIV. However, the estimated rate of vertical
transmission at 18 months of age is still high at 11 per cent. This is aggravated by weak
postnatal identification and follow-up of mothers living with HIV and their HIV-exposed
infants.
5. HIV and AIDS continues to remain the most pressing challenge facing Swaziland. The
country has the highest rate of HIV prevalence in the world, with 26 per cent of 15–49-yearolds, or an estimated 190,000 people, living with HIV.8,9 The rate is 31 per cent for women
and 20 per cent for men. Overall, HIV incidence has fallen by half between 2010 and 2015,
from 4.6 to 2.3 per cent. High-risk population groups for new infections include women aged

1

http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/swaziland/overview
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2010.
3
Draft United Nations country synthesis report, October 2014.
4
Ibid.
5
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2014
6
Demographic and Housing Survey, 2012.
7
Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, 2012.
8
Swaziland Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 2006-2007.
9
UNAIDS currently estimates that over 190,000 people are living with HIV.
2

2/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

18–19 years (incidence of 3.8 per cent), 20–24 years (4.2 per cent), women aged 35–39 years
(4.1 per cent), and men aged 30–34 years (3.1 per cent).10 There is a high incidence of
tuberculosis linked to HIV, resulting in a co-epidemic affecting 1,287 per 100,000 people.11
In children, tuberculosis and HIV co-infection drastically increases the risk of mortality.12
6. A consequence of the HIV epidemic is the extremely high number of children living
without appropriate family care. Approximately 45 per cent of children fall into this category,
24 per cent having lost one and 5 per cent both parents.13 While social protection spending
accounts for 2.2 per cent of gross domestic product,14 the system could benefit from better
targeting, more comprehensive services and protection mechanisms and greater support to
overcome child poverty and vulnerability.15
7. Chronic undernutrition remains a significant problem. The prevalence of stunting is 26
per cent in children under the age of 5 years, higher in rural (27 per cent) and specific
geographic areas (27 per cent in Shiselweni and Lubombo regions). Forty-five per cent of
women aged 15-49 years and 42 per cent of children aged 6-59 months have anaemia.16 Major
causes of poor nutrition include low rates of exclusive breastfeeding among infants aged 0–
6 months (64 per cent), inadequate complementary feeding practices, low consumption of
vitamin A, insufficient access to a variety of foods rich in other micronutrients, poor
sanitation and hygiene and high disease prevalence. The negative lifelong effects and
financial burden of stunting are significant. One illustration is higher rates of class repetition
among stunted children, at 18.9 per cent compared with 14 per cent for children who are not
stunted, at an additional cost of approximately $600,000 per year.17 Overall, stunting is
estimated to have cost Swaziland $25 million in lost economic productivity.
8. Swaziland has made significant progress in broadening access to primary education
(grades 1–7) with a net enrolment rate of 96 per cent in 2012 (97 per cent for boys and 95.2
per cent for girls).18 The repetition rate remains high at 16 per cent, affecting more boys than
girls. At 76 per cent, the survival rate in primary school remains relatively low. Net enrolment
at secondary level is extremely low at 27 per cent, coupled with a low retention rate,
especially for boys.19 Contributing factors include the cost of lower secondary school
education, demand-side barriers including pressure for children to perform household chores
instead of attending school, adolescent pregnancy and violence in and around schools. The
quality of education also remains a concern, with challenges including a shortage of qualified
teachers, weak governance systems and the lack of basic resources such as water, sanitation

10

Swaziland Incidence Measurement Survey Study, 2011.
World Bank, http://www.tradingeconomics.com/swaziland/incidence-of-tuberculosis-per-100-000people-wb-data.html.
12
Co-infection of tuberculosis and HIV in children carries a long-term mortality at 32 months that is 2-10
times higher than for tuberculosis alone. Dick J, Mbewe A et al.
13
MICS 2010.
14
Draft United Nations country synthesis report, October 2014.
15
UNICEF situation analysis, 2013.
16
According to the Micronutrient Initiative (2009), around 24 per cent of pregnant women and 45 per cent
of women in general had anaemia (Hb<110 g/L). The 2006–2007 DHS reports 42 per cent of boys and
girls age 6–59 months having some degree of anaemia. The Swaziland MICS report estimates that one
fifth of perinatal mortality and one tenth of maternal mortality can be attributed to iron-deficiency
anaemia.
17
National Children's Coordination Unit, 2013.
18
Australian Council for Educational Research.
19
Ibid.
11

3/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

and hygiene (WASH) supplies and facilities in some schools. The education system would
also benefit from programmes focusing on empowering children with life skills.
9. Early childhood development (ECD) is just beginning to be acknowledged as a critical
contribution to building the country’s social capital. Bottlenecks include a lack of integrated
ECD policies and limited awareness among parents of the importance of the early years and
insufficient skills to support the development of young children, all the more so for children
with disabilities. Only 33 per cent of children aged 3-6 years are enrolled in preschool and
there are significant rural-urban, geographical and wealth disparities in access; enrolment is
50 per cent for children from the wealthiest households, and only 21 per cent for children
from the poorest households. 20
10. Physical, sexual and/or emotional violence against children and adolescents continues
to be a major problem, especially in the home. Approximately one in three females report
experiencing sexual violence as a child, nearly one in four were exposed to physical violence
and 3 in 10 experienced some form of emotional abuse.21 A vast majority (89 per cent) of
children aged 2–14 years reported having experienced at least one form of physical
punishment at home.22 While the national legislative framework is largely aligned with
international human rights standards, more remains to be done to protect children, including
the implementation of the Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence Bill. The Bill calls for
adjustments in the allocation of resources, standards for services, professional training and
the care and referral system, and accountability mechanisms for child protection. The One
Stop Centre, located only in the capital city, offers a model of comprehensive response for
violence survivors which should be scaled up across the country to increase the coverage of
health, protection and counselling services for children and women.
11. Inadequate WASH practices affect family health and nutrition; poor results in this area
contribute to about a quarter of under-five deaths. Some 40 per cent of children have been
identified as being deprived of access to safe water and 20 per cent to adequate sanitation.
The situation is further complicated by significant inequalities: 90 per cent of people in the
wealthiest quintile have access to an improved water source, against 10 per cent for the
poorest. Similarly, the corresponding estimates are 91 per cent for the urban population and
60 per cent for the rural. Access to adequate sanitation stands at 78 per cent, with 15 per cent
of the population practising open defecation, a rate which is higher in rural areas (20 per
cent).23
12. The National Disaster Management Authority develops and regularly updates plans and
uses early warning systems to improve forecasting and safeguard against disasters. Threats
include droughts, floods, wildfires, windstorms, hailstorms and disease outbreaks. The wide
income disparities, high rates of youth unemployment, expanding peri-urban populations and
limited access to economic opportunities are cause for concern.
13. The following lessons learned from the previous country programme contributed to the
design of this country programme:
(a) The reclassification of Swaziland from the low- to the middle-income category has
resulted in withdrawal of some traditional bilateral and multilateral partners, resulting in
decreased inflows of development aid to the country. As a result, UNICEF and partners will

20

MICS 2010,
A national study on violence against children and young women in Swaziland, 2007.
22
MICS 2010.
23
MICS 2010 and UNICEF situation analysis, 2013.
21

4/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

need to adopt strategic and innovative approaches to mobilize and leverage resources for
children and review the effectiveness of current allocations;
(b) Despite high coverage of basic social services in areas such as health, HIV and education,
progress has not been sufficiently rapid in the areas of reducing mortality, HIV incidence,
stunting and increasing educational attainment. This suggests that the quality and
effectiveness of services should be areas of focus.
14. The limited availability of quality, timely and disaggregated data is a challenge, limiting
effective planning, monitoring and budgeting for children as well as advocacy and leveraging
efforts. UNICEF will focus on supporting national monitoring and evaluation systems
including household surveys, studies, assessments and gap analyses to generate timely
evidence to inform policy and programming decisions.

Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The Government of Swaziland and the United Nations country team agreed to adopt
the Delivering as One modality in Swaziland in 2014. The country programme will contribute
to the first, second and third pillars of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2016–2020. The overall goal of the country programme is to
contribute to national efforts to enable children, adolescents and women to realize their rights
by progressively reducing disparities and inequities. To achieve this goal, the country
programme will employ a mix of strategies, including:
(a) Policy dialogue and advocacy to strengthen legislative frameworks and policies and
leverage resources for delivery of results for children;
(b) Capacity development for policy implementation, delivery of quality services and
creation of demand for services;
(c) Evidence generation, including information management, and reporting to ensure that
evidence is used to improve policies, programmes and accountability;
(d) Innovation, South–South cooperation and communication for development will be used
to complement the other strategies, and enhance social accountability for children’s rights,
including empowering communities to demand services and promoting positive behaviours.
16. The country programme will comprise three components: (a) young child survival and
development; (b) adolescent protection, learning and development; and (c) programme
effectiveness. HIV programming will be at the heart of the country programme, as will
ensuring an equity focus across all interventions, so that all children have access to quality
and inclusive services. Disaster risk reduction, including preparedness and response, will be
mainstreamed in the programme components.

Programme component 1. Young child survival and development
17. This component will aim for the following outcome: by end of 2020, young girls and
boys will be immunized, healthy, registered at birth and ready for school. The programme
will focus on strengthening national capacities to provide an essential package of high-impact
HIV-sensitive integrated maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) services to ensure
healthy growth and development, particularly during a child’s first 1,000 days of life.
18. In the area of MNCH, the programme will support strengthening the enabling
environment to address priority issues including monitoring the implementation of standards,

5/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

adoption of positive health practices and improved community outreach to hard-to-reach
populations. The focus areas include:
(a) Strengthening application of standardized emergency obstetric and newborn care;
(b) Working with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and
partners to support capacity strengthening in the area of eliminating new HIV infections in
children and keeping mothers alive through the comprehensive four-pronged approach, with
a particular focus on the provision of lifelong antiretroviral therapy to all pregnant women
and lactating mothers living with HIV, and on paediatric HIV care and treatment, especially
around bridging the gap between community-level care and health facilities;
(c) Improving full immunization coverage within the expanded programme on
immunization and strengthening the cold chain to sustain the country’s gains in lowering the
incidence of vaccine-preventable diseases in children;
(d) Strengthening nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions for children and
mothers in coordination with other sectors, including scaling-up of the Baby-Friendly
Hospital Initiative and appropriate infant and young child feeding practices;
(e) Promoting positive WASH practices and the community-led total sanitation model to
eliminate open defecation;
(f) Strengthening national capacity to implement and monitor the National Strategic Plan
on Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) 2016–2020, which seeks to improve access
and quality of birth registration services as part of the overall CRVS system.
19. In the area of ECD, the programme aims to increase access and coverage of integrated
ECD services that meet national standards, especially for the most vulnerable children. This
includes strengthening the capacities of the Government, parents and caregivers to provide
appropriate early learning and nurturing approaches in formal and non-formal settings; and
monitoring all ECD centres to ensure that they meet minimum standards on safety, care,
nutrition and early stimulation, and integrate early learning and school readiness. The
programme will also focus on strengthening the link between ECD referral systems and child
health and child protection services; and supporting families and caregivers to provide the
best care and stimulation for young children.
20. To improve evidence generation, use and accountability, the programme will support
strengthening the capacity of the health information management system (HMIS) to provide
timely disaggregated data. The young child survival and development programme component
will work in the framework of global and regional initiatives, including 'A Promise Renewed',
the Every Newborn Action Plan, the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement and the GAVI
Alliance.

Programme component 2. Adolescent protection, learning and
development
21. This component will aim for the following outcome: By the end of 2020, adolescent
girls and boys aged 10–19 years have increased protection from violence and access to quality
health services and secondary education. The focus will be on achieving results for
adolescents through increased investment, better national coordination and the provision of
services tailored to adolescents, particularly in the areas of protection against violence,
education and quality learning outcomes, and HIV prevention, care and treatment.

6/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

22. Within the framework of the global UNICEF End Violence against Children campaign,
the programme will support strengthening the enabling environment to prevent violence
against children and adolescents, with a focus on national capacities to legislate, plan and
budget for scaling up interventions that prevent and respond to violence, abuse, exploitation
and neglect of children. Implementation and awareness of the Children’s Protection and
Welfare Act and advocacy for enactment of the Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence Bill
and its subsequent implementation will be prioritized. National guidelines for child protection
systems including minimum standards for (residential) childcare facilities, referral
mechanisms and case management of violence against children will be developed and
implemented, and the capacity to identify, report and refer child rights violations and to
ensure adequate provision of care for all vulnerable groups will be enhanced. Recognizing
the limited coverage and quality of existing prevention and response services for violence
against children, the programme will focus on making schools safe and protective for children
through the implementation of the child-friendly schools initiative. The programme will also
support the roll-out of the One Stop Centre model throughout the country and in all major
hospitals, as well as testing and scaling up effective preventive interventions at community
level. The programme will support the establishment of a toll-free child helpline to register
cases of abuse and violence and provide effective referrals to support children and
adolescents.
23. Within the area of education and quality learning, the programme will focus on
redressing gaps in services for adolescents and the promotion of adolescent development,
protection and citizenship. To promote timely transition between grades and improve
retention in school, the programme will support better learning outcomes and teachers'
capacities to implement child-friendly approaches in schools. UNICEF will continue to
advocate for free basic education to support higher enrolment in lower secondary education.
To strengthen evidence-based programming, planning and budgeting in the sector, UNICEF
will support the education management information system for timely generation of data, and
undertake relevant studies to better understand factors influencing out-of-school children and
to support inclusion.
24. In the area of HIV prevention, care and treatment, the programme will seek to influence
behavioural change among adolescents by mainstreaming HIV and AIDS education in
primary and secondary schools, including through rolling out the recently developed
comprehensive sexuality education and HIV curriculum in secondary schools, as well as
programmatic approaches for life-skills education and sport for development. Support will
be provided for the expansion of accessible HIV testing and counselling services targeting
adolescents, with emphasis on HIV prevention, care and treatment. This part of the
programme is part of global initiatives for the prevention of HIV and violence, including the
'ALL IN! #End Adolescent AIDS' initiative.

Programme component 3. Programme effectiveness
25. This programme component supports programme delivery and managing for results and
comprises: evidence generation and planning, monitoring and evaluation; social protection;
and strategic communication, advocacy, resource mobilization and partnerships. This
programme will be implemented in the following strategic areas.
26. Evidence generation and planning, monitoring and evaluation will support the country
programme in monitoring results and targeting programmes to benefit the most excluded and
disadvantaged children. In addition, child-centred research and evidence will be generated to

7/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

inform policy decisions, and national capacities for generating timely, quality, disaggregated
and gender-sensitive data will be strengthened.
27. In the area of social protection, UNICEF will advocate for targeted, equity-focused
government social protection programmes to ensure that vulnerable children and adolescents
have access to quality services. The social protection area will also focus on strengthening
national and subnational capacities to deliver effective HIV-sensitive social protection
programmes with linkages to key sectors such as health, education and child protection,
resulting in a fully-budgeted national social protection programme, benefiting the most
vulnerable children.
28. In the area of strategic communication, advocacy, resource mobilization and
partnerships, UNICEF will nurture strategic partnerships to increase the momentum around
child rights in Swaziland. New strategic alliances will be formed with the private and
philanthropic sectors for development and innovation in specific programme areas.
Cooperation with other middle-income countries in the region will continue to be prioritized,
to generate and share knowledge and resources, mobilize resources and leverage support.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Young child survival and development

2 500

7 000

9 500

Adolescent protection, learning and
development

3 000

5 000

8 000

575

1 700

2 275

6 075

13 700

19 775

Programme effectiveness
Total

Programme and risk management
29. This country programme document outlines the UNICEF contributions to national
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board.
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to
country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies
and procedures.
30. The country programme will be coordinated as part of the UNDAF, and will be
implemented in cooperation with the Government of Swaziland, under the leadership of the
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development and in collaboration with parastatal
institutions, research institutions and universities.
31. UNICEF will monitor results through annual management plans, section work plans
and internal annual and peer reviews with implementing partners to assess the key strategic,
programmatic, operational and financial risks, and define appropriate risk control and
mitigation measures. UNICEF will continue to monitor the effectiveness of governance and
management systems, stewardship of financial resources and management of human
resources. Management of the comprehensive harmonized approach to cash transfers will be
strengthened as a way to mitigate risks in programme implementation.

8/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

32. With Swaziland a Delivering as One self-starter country, the Business Operations
Strategy will be implemented to harmonize and reduce business operating costs. United
Nations agencies will continue to share common premises and some common services, with
security oversight provided by the United Nations Department of Safety and Security.

Monitoring and evaluation
33. Progress towards planned results will be monitored using the indicators contained in
the results and resources framework (see annex), based on the UNDAF 2016–2020, the
UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014–2017 and the Eastern and Southern Africa regional
management indicators. UNICEF will work with the Central Statistical Office and other
relevant national institutions to effectively monitor progress toward national and international
goals and to track inequities using timely and relevant data.
34. UNICEF will also work with partners to strengthen national monitoring and evaluation
systems capacity to use data to monitor results by institutionalizing the concept of resultsbased management. Emphasis will be placed on improving programme performance
monitoring, and creating feedback mechanisms contributing to systems strengthening
through the mainstreaming of the UNICEF Monitoring Results for Equity System.
35. In coordination with the Government, UNICEF will conduct reviews of the country
programme at mid- and end-term to determine programme impact. Periodic surveys, studies
and research on key issues will be prioritized in the country programme. Additional research
will be undertaken as needed to provide more in-depth analysis on key issues.

9/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

Annex
Results and resources framework
Government of the Kingdom of Swaziland – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child: All articles
National priorities: (related Millennium Development Goals, other internationally recognized goals, and/or national goals): All Millennium
Development Goals and child-related sustainable development goals.
National Priorities: His Majesty’s Government Programme of Action 2013–2018: Vision 2022; Poverty Reduction Strategy and Action Plan (PRSAP);
Swaziland National Development Strategy (NDS); extended National Strategic Framework on HIV (eNSF).
UNDAF 2016–2020 outcomes involving UNICEF:
Outcome indicators measuring change that includes UNICEF contribution (UNDAF outcome indicators, copied verbatim from UNDAF)
Youth, women and vulnerable group’s opportunity for employment, income generation and sustainable livelihoods increased by 2020.


Percentage of children under 5 years stunted.
Baseline (2014): 26% Target 20%
Children’s and adolescents access to quality and inclusive education and retention in school increased by 2020.
 Percentage of children aged 36–59 months currently attending early childhood development and learning.
Baseline (2014): 30%
Target: 65%



Lower secondary education (Net enrolment rate).
Baseline (2012): 27% (female, 30%; male, 22%)

Target 80%

Primary school survival rate.
Baseline (2012): 76.4% (female, 78.3%; male, 73.7%) Target: 90%



Repetition rate primary and lower secondary.
Baseline (2012): 15.5% (female, 13.3%; male, 17.7%) Target: 9.5% (female, 9.25%; male 9.25%; female, 8.5%; male, 9.5%)
Families and communities’ access to and uptake of quality health and nutrition services increased by 2020.


Percentage of children aged 12–23 months vaccinated against childhood diseases.
Baseline (2014): 75% Target: 95%



Proportion of pregnancies with an antenatal visit in the first trimester.
Baseline (2007): 26% Target: 50%



Proportion of mothers and their babies receiving postnatal care within six weeks of delivery.
Mother: Baseline (2014): 87%
Target: 95%

10/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25



Percentage of children aged 0–6 months old exclusively breastfed.
Baseline (2014): -64% Target: 80%



Percentage of children aged 6–23 months receiving a minimum meal frequency of complementary foods.
Baseline (2014): 81% Target 90%



Percentage of population practising open defecation.
Baseline ( (2014): 10.7%
Target: <1%
Youths’ risky sexual behaviours reduced and citizens’ uptake of HIV services increased by 2020.


Percentage of young people aged 15–24 who report using a condom during first sex.
Baseline (2010): female, 43%; male, 49%
Target: female, 65%; male, 70%



Percentage of adults and children currently receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART) among all adults and children living with HIV.
Baseline (2013): 49.9% Target: 90%



Mother-to-child HIV transmission rate at 18 months.
Baseline (2013): 11% Target: <5%



Teenage pregnancy rate.
Baseline (2007): 25% Target: 7%

Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcome(s): (from Strategic Plan 2014–2017)
1. Health. Improved and equitable use of high-impact maternal and child health interventions from pregnancy to adolescence and promotion of health
behaviours.
2. HIV and AIDS. Improved and equitable use of proven HIV prevention and treatment interventions by children, pregnant women and adolescents.
3. Water, sanitation and hygiene. Improved and equitable use of safe drinking water, sanitation and healthy environments, and improved hygiene
practices.
4. Nutrition. Improved and equitable use of nutritional support and improved nutrition and are practices.
5. Education. Improved learning outcomes and equitable and inclusive education.
6. Child protection. Improved and equitable prevention of and response to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect of children.
7. Social inclusion. Improved policy environment and systems for disadvantaged and excluded children, guided by improved knowledge and data.

11/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

UNICEF
Outcomes

Key Progress Indicators,
Baselines and Targets

Means of
Verification

Indicative Country Programme
Outputs

Major Partners,
Partnership
Frameworks

Indicative resources
by country
programme outcome
(in thousands of US
dollars)
RR

OR

Total

1. YOUNG CHILD SURVIVAL AND DEVELOPMENT
By end of 2020,
young girls and
boys will be
immunized,
healthy,
registered at
birth and ready
for school.

Percentage of children aged
12-23 months fully
immunized.
Baseline (2014): 75%
Target: 90%
Percentage of children aged
0-6 months old exclusively
breastfed.
Baseline (2014): 64%
Target: 80%
Percentage of children aged
6-23 months receiving a
minimum acceptable diet of
complementary foods.
Baseline (2014): 62%
Target: 80%
Percentage of population
practising open defecation.
Baseline (2010): 15%
Target: <1%
Children born to mothers
living with HIV who have

12/16

Household
surveys (DHS
and MICS)
Sector studies
National budget

Output 1.
Appropriate legislation, policies,
strategic plans and budgets for
maternal, newborn, and child
health, ECD and nutrition
improved.
Output 2.
Capacity of key government
institutions to provide quality
health, HIV, nutrition, education
and birth registration services
increased.
Output 3.
Capacity of parents and
caregivers to provide integrated
quality ECD (early stimulation,
learning, safety, care and
nutrition) strengthened.
Output 4.
Capacity of health and education
management information systems
(HMIS/EMIS) to provide timely

Government
Ministry of Health;
Deputy Prime
Minister’s Office;
Ministry of Home
Affairs;
Ministry of Education
and Training;
Ministry of Economic
Planning and
Development
United Nations
UNAIDS
WHO
UNFPA
UNESCO
Other
United States
President's Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief
(PEPFAR);
Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria;

2 500

7 000

9 500

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

acquired the virus through
vertical transmission, at 18
months of age
Baseline: (2013) 11%
Target: <5%
Birth registration rate
Baseline (2014): 54%
Target: 80%
Percentage of children
under 5 years meeting
relevant growth and
developmental milestones
(ECD index)*
Baseline65% (2014)
Target: 80% (2020)
Percentage of children
under age 5 years with two
or more types of playthings
that the child plays with:
Baseline: 67%
Target: 89%
(* ECD index is calculated
as the percentage of
children who are
developmentally on track in
at least three of four
domains:
literacy/numeracy;
physical; and
social/emotional and
learning.)

disaggregated information
improved.

Civil society
organizations (CSOs);
Faith-based
organizations (FBOs);
Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs);
Academia;
Media;
Professional
associations;
Training institutes;
Development partners
Partnership
frameworks
Committing to Child
Survival: A Promise
Renewed ;
Scaling Up Nutrition
(SUN) ;
Every Woman, Every
Child including the
Every Newborn
Action Plan;
GAVI Alliance
African Union Africa
Programme on
Accelerated
Improvement of Civil
Registration and Vital
Statistics;

13/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

2. ADOLESCENT PROTECTION, LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
By end of 2020,
adolescent girls
and boys aged
10-19 years
have increased
protection from
violence and
access to
quality health
services and
secondary
education.

Percentage of girls aged less
than 18 years who
experienced sexual violence.
Baseline (2010): 33%
Target: 15%
Percentage of adolescents
aged 15–19 tested for HIV.
Baseline: (2010) 57%
Target: 90%
Number of adolescents living
with HIV who have initiated
ART.
Baseline (2013): 2,000
Target: 15,000
Percentage of adolescent
girls aged 15-19 years who
had sex with a noncohabiting partner in the last
12 months and reported using
a condom at the most recent
sexual encounter.
Baseline (2010): 66%
Target: 86%

14/16

Household
surveys (DHS
and MICS)
Sector studies

Output 1.
Government capacity to legislate,
plan, budget for and implement
prevention and response to
violence, abuse, exploitation and
neglect of children strengthened.
Output 2.
Government and civil society
capacity to identify and report
child abuse, and provide
appropriate care strengthened,
especially for vulnerable groups.
Output 3.
Safe and protective environments
in schools improved.
Output 4.
Adolescents completion of
quality education increased.
Output 5.
Life-skills interventions to
prevent adolescent pregnancy
strengthened.

Percentage of adolescent
girls and boys aged 15-19
years with comprehensive
HIV knowledge.

Output 6.
HIV prevention, care and
treatment services for adolescents
strengthened.

Girls:
Baseline (2010): 56%
Target: 80%

Output 7.
Capacity of primary and
secondary educational institutions

Government
Ministry of Health;
Deputy Prime
Minister’s Office;
Ministry of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs;
Ministry of Education
and Training;
Ministry of Economic
Planning and
Development;
Royal Swaziland
Police Service;
United Nations
UNAIDS
WHO
UNFPA
UNESCO
Other
PEPFAR;
Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria;
CSOs;
FBOs;
NGOs;
Academia;
Media;
Professional
associations;
Training institutes;
Development partners;

3 000

5 000

8 000

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

Boys:
Baseline (2010): 52%
Target: 75%
Percentage of children of
secondary school age who
are out of school
Baseline: TBD*
Target: 5%
(*Survey to be conducted
this year to inform baseline)

to disseminate comprehensive
knowledge on HIV and AIDS
strengthened.
Output 8.
Perceptions, attitudes and
knowledge on key harmful social
norms improved.

Partnership
frameworks
Government of
Swaziland Extended
National Strategic
Framework for HIV
and AIDS (eNSF);
All In! to
#EndAdolescentAIDS
initiative;
DREAMS Initiative;
End Violence Against
Children Campaign
(#EndViolence);

15/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.25

3. Programme effectiveness
By end of 2020,
evidence
generation and
advocacy for
evidence-based
policy decisions
enhanced.

Percentage of evaluation
recommendations
implemented.
Percentage of GDP allocated
to social protection.
Baseline: 2.2%
Target: 3.5%

Central
Statistical
Office
Sector reports
National
budget

Output 1. Quality disaggregated
and gender-sensitive data for
evidence-based decisions
available.
Output 2. National capacity to
develop an HIV- and childsensitive social protection policy
framework and action plan
strengthened.

Government
Deputy Prime
Minister’s Office;
Ministry of Home
Affairs;
Ministry of Education
and Training;
Central Statistics
Office;
Ministry of Economic
Planning and
Development;

600

1 700

2 300

United Nations
UNDP
WFP
UNFPA
Other
European Union;
World Bank;
CSOs;
FBOs;
NGOs;
Academia;
Media;
Professional
associations;
Training institutes;
Development partners.

Total resources

6 100

_______

16/16

13 700 19 800

