Syrian Arab Republic
Country programme document
2007-2011

The draft country programme document for the Syrian Arab
Republic (E/ICEF/2006/P/L.24) was presented to the Executive
Board for discussion and comments at its 2006 annual session (5-9
June 2006).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2007 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 19 January 2007.

†

Basic data
(2004 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births, 2002)

8.3
16

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2000)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2001)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2002/2003)
Primary schoolchildren reaching grade 5 (%, 2001/2002)

7
65
100/96
91

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2002)

79

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, end 2003)

0.1

Child work (%, children 5-14 years old)
GNI per capita (US$)

8
1 190

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

†

More comprehensive country data on children and women are available at www.unicef.org.

The situation of children and women
1. The Syrian Arab Republic has made significant gains which have contributed to
improving the situation of children and women, and the country is likely to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. According to the 2004 census, the infant
mortality rate (IMR) and under-five mortality rate (U5MR), respectively 17 and 19
per 1,000 live births, are lower than those of other countries in the region that have a
higher gross national product.
2. The Government is committed to implementing the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The Government, in cooperation with civil society, developed policy
frameworks for child protection, early childhood development (ECD) and
adolescents and young people.
3.
In view of regional political instability and the country’s developing social
market-oriented economy, the Syrian Arab Republic faces serious challenges in
terms of sustaining these achievements and protecting the disadvantaged, including
children and women, from possible adverse effects. Although a recent study showed
that the rate of poverty declined from 14 per cent in 1997 to 11 per cent, the figure
remains high and underscores persistent geographic and rural/urban disparities,
especially in the Northern, Eastern and Badia regions. Health services have
improved in the last decade, but health indicators in those areas are lower than the
national average. Approximately 30 per cent of pregnant women still do not receive
prenatal care and 23 per cent do not receive post-natal care. Overall, at least 45 per
cent of pregnant women deliver at home and almost 10 per cent suffer from postpartum complications. Nutrition indicators for children show that the situation
among certain communities is worsening.
4.
Disparities are evident in terms of water and sanitation services, with access to
safe water ranging from 97 per cent in urban areas to as low as 76 per cent in rural
areas. Partly as a result of internal migration, Syria’s urban areas have experienced

2

more rapid growth than the rest of the country and the country’s population is
becoming increasingly urban. This trend will exacerbate problems already seen in
cities like Damascus and Aleppo, including the development of poor informal
dwelling areas with poor sanitation conditions and weak social service delivery for
vulnerable populations.
5.
Overall primary-school enrolment rates are above 90 per cent, but completion
rates at all levels are an area of concern. In 1993, 93 per cent of all children reached
grade six, compared to 88.5 per cent in 2004. Studies indicate that school drop-out
rates are influenced by economic and social choices and the quality and relevance of
the curriculum. Access is an issue because many children live far from the nearest
school. In addition, the gender disparity is wider in these areas, mainly because of
social values and traditions.
6.
The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is low, with a total of 347 HIV-positive cases
registered to date, but the estimated number of HIV-infected people is closer to
1,000 according to the Ministry of Health. Although a national strategic plan exists,
factors that prevent people from being tested like increased mobility, high
unemployment, stigma and discrimination may result in a high number of
undetected cases.
7.
Almost 60 per cent of the population is now aged 15-24 years. Adolescents and
young people, who already face a changing social environment resulting from
increased access to new channels of communications and a difficult economic
conjuncture with an overstretched job market, are likely to become more vulnerable
in a context of reform.
8.
Despite policy initiatives which have broken the silence on child protection
issues, some legislation needs to be reviewed and improved. In addition, the
coordination mechanism needs to be enhanced to ensure prevention, support and
rehabilitation of children subject to abuse, violence, exploitation and neglect,
especially those in conflict with the law and deprived of their primary caregivers.
There is a need to build capacity of staff working in juvenile facilities as well as to
improve the quality of the services provided. There is also a need to develop
standards promoting alternative care for children in institutions. Despite successive
laws and measures aiming at curbing child labour, including raising the age of
compulsory education and the minimum working age to 15 years, 10-14 year-old
children still make up 2 per cent of the currently employed national workforce1.
Other aspects of child labour, especially involving girls, are not documented,
particularly housework and agricultural work.
9.
Although non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are increasingly active in
the social development area, and despite government efforts to adjust the legal
framework to the new environment created by the modernization of administrative
processes; there is still a significant need to enhance capacity-building for those
NGOs in managerial and technical fields based on principles of efficiency,
transparency and accountability.

1

National Population Census, 2004, Preliminary Results – Central Bureau of
Statistics.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2002-2006
Key results
_____
10. The strategic results of reducing IMR, U5MR and the maternal mortality ratio
(MMR) by 15 per cent were achieved. Immunization coverage remains above 95 per
cent and the routine immunization programme was strengthened by training of midlevel managers in all governorates. Training of mobile health teams contributed to
the successful outreach to Badia areas for nomadic communities.
11. The “healthy villages” programme, under the coordination of the Ministry of
Health, continued to serve as an entry point to structured, community-level
interventions. Over 75 villages in the five northern governorates have joined the
programme since 2002, receiving support in the areas of healthy lifestyles for
adolescents, child-friendly homes and communities, women’s empowerment and
environmental health messages.
12. A national ECD strategy was developed, and the component involving
community outreach workers was successfully implemented, reaching around
12,000 families in North and Eastern regions. Health education curricula were
introduced in all primary schools.
13. A flour fortification pilot project was carried out in Salamiye, an area with a
high rate of iron-deficiency anaemia, particularly among children and pregnant
women. The technical expertise and capacity gained through this project will allow
for its expansion at a national level and thus improve the nutritional status of
children.
14. Advocacy and policy dialogue resulted in the extension of compulsory and
free education up to the ninth grade (age 15 years).The development and
implementation of a condensed curriculum by the Ministry of Education provided
opportunities for female drop-outs to re-enrol and pursue their basic education. This
provides additional support to such other preventive measures as the child-friendly
school initiative.
15. Several policy and legislative initiatives stressed issues relevant to child
protection. The minimum age for working children was raised to 15 years, the
minimum legal age for marriage was raised to 17 years for girls and 18 years for
boys, and a modest step was made in increasing the age of criminal accountability
from 7 to 10 years. In 2005, a National Child Protection Plan was developed by
government and non-governmental partners to create a functioning system to protect
all children from violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation. A program to build the
capacities of professionals working with children in conflict with the law was
initiated for police, social workers and staff working in juvenile centres.
16. During the programme period, the Syrian Arab Republic ratified the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and International
Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 182 on combating the worst forms of child
labour. In 2005, the Republic’s Grand Mufti and Ministry of Al Awqaf and Religious

4

Affairs recommended that the country lift its reservations to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
Lessons learned
17. The inclusive education project to enrol children with disabilities in school,
conducted by the Ministry of Education with the support of international partners,
helped to build experience on a concrete set of good practices that should lead to a
gradual expansion of inclusive education in Syria. An evaluation conducted with the
participation of all actors, including children, demonstrated that an important factor
in its success is the involvement of parents and the community with the school. This
shows the necessity to continue to develop linkages between schools, communities
and civil society organizations (CSOs) so that the rights of these children and their
families can be better fulfilled.
18. The experience initiated in 2004 in partnership with the national HIV/AIDS
programme to prevent the spread of the disease among the most at-risk adolescents
and youth, showed the effectiveness of setting stronger partnerships with NGOs.
Building on the technical expertise of the Ministry of Health and the experiences of
the Syrian Family Planning Association and the Syrian Red Crescent in mobilizing
volunteers, the programme was able to reach this group through an innovative peer
communication system. Confidential counselling and testing services could also be
established for the first time in the country. Syria is participating in the Unite for
Children, Unite against AIDS campaign, which will continue in the upcoming
country programme.
19. Children were involved in promoting the Convention on the Rights of the
Child by making recommendations to decisions makers on issues that affect their
lives; writing and performing a play and producing over 100 drawings on the
Convention; and expressing themselves on the internet and through stories about
violence. Their contributions led to the realization by duty bearers of the need to
mainstream effective and inclusive child participation in the development and
implementation of projects.

The country programme, 2007-2011
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Programme

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Child survival and development

1 000

150

1 150

Quality basic education

1 000

150

1 150

400

500

900

HIV prevention for adolescents
Child protection

620

250

870

Policy, advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights

385

400

785

1 200

—

1 200

4 605

1 450

6 055

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

Preparation process
20. In April 2004, the Government and United Nations agencies agreed on a
framework for developing the new United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF), which is closely linked to the Government’s Tenth Five-Year
Development Plan. UNICEF participated in the Common Country Assessment
(CCA), providing data and technical analysis on indicators related to the
Millennium Development Goals and ensuring that the CCA included an analysis of
the child protection situation. The conclusions and recommendations of mid-term
review of the UNICEF country programme, held in 2004, were also taken into
account.
21. Following the adoption of the CCA, the Government and United Nations
agencies agreed on five main areas of cooperation for the UNDAF: economic
growth and sustainable livelihood; governance; basic social services; environment;
and disaster management. The UNDAF was endorsed at a Joint Strategy Meeting in
February 2006. UNICEF played a key role in the preparation of the UNDAF,
ensuring a clear focus on children and use of human rights-based approach to
programming. UNICEF also arranged training on this approach for all United
Nations agencies and a manual is now being translated into Arabic to support future
training of counterparts.
22. The UNICEF country programme for 2007-2011 is based on the UNDAF
results framework, the Tenth National Five-Year Plan 2006–2010, national plans for
child protection, ECD and youth that were developed in 2005, and the observations
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Significant efforts were made to
involve representatives of civil society, NGOs and young people in the development
of the programme.
Goals, key results and strategies
23. The overall goal of the country programme is the progressive realization of
children’s rights to survival, development, education, participation and protection,
with a particular focus on underserved areas and groups.
24. The expected key results of the country programme are: (a) IMR and U5MR
reduced by 15 per cent, and MMR reduced by 20 per cent in Northern and Eastern
governorates; (b) at national level, the prevalence of underweight and stunted
children under five years of age reduced by 20 and 10 per cent respectively; (c) all
children aged 6-15 years in targeted high drop-out areas (to be defined with the
Ministry of Education and other partners) and other disadvantaged areas are
enrolled in and complete quality basic education with an adequate level of learning
achievement; (d) all basic education schools apply minimum standards of quality
education; (e) at least 70 per cent of adolescents have correct knowledge of HIV
prevention, and at least 45 per cent of the most at-risk adolescents have access to
life-saving protective information, skills, and adolescent-friendly services for HIV
prevention, care and support; (f) legislation, policies, systems and capacity are in
place to protect children from violence, abuse and exploitation and to provide
children deprived of primary caregivers an environment appropriate for their
development; and (g) targeted social safety nets are set up to protect vulnerable
children and women from deprivation and to ensure their access to basic social
services.

6

25. The strategies to be implemented are: (a) to build the capacities of duty bearers
at both national and local levels, particularly in the most disadvantaged areas, to
ensure the realization of children’s and women’s rights; (b) to support CSOs
involved in child welfare so they can participate more efficiently and fully in caring
for the most vulnerable children; (c) advocacy, communication and social
mobilization for catalyzing the process of socio-cultural change, focusing on
disadvantaged communities, children and families; (d) to promote opportunities for
children, women and CSOs to participate effectively in the development and
implementation of public policies, planning and programmes; and (e) to coordinate
with United Nations agencies and other donors to realize the potential for synergy
between initiatives and approaches.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
26. The country programme will respond to national priorities as stated in the
Tenth Five-Year Development Plan, including building capacities at decentralized
and local levels, promoting participation of NGOs and community-based
organizations (CBOs), reviewing the legal framework to protect children and
women and promoting targeted social safety nets for vulnerable groups. The
programme will aim at decreasing disparities in terms of access to and quality of
health, education and other social services, with a focus on the Northern and Eastern
regions of the country and other disadvantaged areas. In line with the UNICEF Core
Commitments for Children in Emergencies, UNICEF will coordinate with national
counterparts, the United Nations system and other international partners in
emergency preparedness and response, including to avian influenza.
Relationship to international priorities
27. The programme has been developed to support achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the commitments of A World Fit for Children, adopted by
the General Assembly Special Session on Children. It is in line with the UNICEF
medium-term strategic plan for 2006-2009, the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Declaration of Commitment of the
General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS.
Programme components
28. The child survival and development programme will operate in target areas
and at national level. In the target areas, it aims to develop high-impact health
interventions for mothers and children to address neonatal mortality, domestic
accidents, diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections. Continued support will be
provided jointly with United Nations agencies to prevent and mitigate the effects of
avian flu, particularly through communication for behavioural change.
29. The programme, which will focus on targeted underserved geographic areas
where health indicators are low, will support the development and implementation
of decentralized, outcome-driven health plans that address bottlenecks to improving
children’s health. The programme will seek community involvement for behavioural
change, emphasizing improved hygiene, exclusive breastfeeding, prevention of
accidents and overall better parenting. It will also support improving vaccination
coverage in areas with low coverage rates.

30. At national level, the programme will support the formulation of policies that
articulate child health issues within the larger framework of the national health
policy and the sector reform. To reduce MMR, the programme will support
improving the emergency obstetric care capacities of hospitals. Drawing on lessons
learned from a successful flour fortification project in Salameyeh, a larger-scale
national flour fortification project will be initiated, with the goal of having all
families consuming iron- and vitamin-fortified flour and to improve children’s
general nutrition status.
31. The Ministry of Health will be the main partner. Others will include the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the World Health Organization (WHO), NGOs
and CBOs, which will play an important role at local level in reaching the targets.
32. The expected results of the quality basic education programme are that by
2011, all schools in the target areas will have teachers with the knowledge and skills
to promote an inclusive school environment, as well as effective forums for
community participation. In areas where young children’s learning capacities are
affected by poor nutrition, a meal service will be functioning. This project will be
implemented in collaboration with the World Food Programme (WFP). A Syrian
model for child-friendly schools, based on effective participation of children in all
aspects of the school’s life, will be developed and tested during the next five years.
33. To achieve these results, the programme will focus on geographic areas with
high drop-out rates. In order to foster participatory learning and improve the overall
learning environment, training opportunities will be provided to teachers, social
workers and headmasters. Parents will be more closely associated with school
management through community committees. To help girls stay in school, support
will be given to local initiatives including social mobilization, improving the
physical condition of schools and developing extracurricular activities. At the
national level, the programme will promote a new monitoring system and encourage
the development of new improved standards based on the child-friendly schools
experience in the Syrian Arab Republic.
34. The main partners will be the Ministry of Education, other government
ministries, the Women’s General Union, NGOs, local communities, the private
education sector and international donors, as well as the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and WFP.
35. The HIV prevention for adolescents programme will strive to reduce
adolescents’ vulnerabilities to HIV/AIDS. By 2011, appropriate information on
HIV/AIDS and services for voluntary and confidential testing and counselling will
be provided in 8 of 14 governorates, reaching 30 per cent of the most vulnerable
adolescents in these areas. The availability of reproductive and sexual health
education, with a special focus on preventing HIV/AIDS and sexually-transmitted
infections among adolescents, will be ensured by targeted advocacy campaigns. The
programme will also support the implementation of the national HIV/AIDS
strategies through life-skills-based education by working with the most vulnerable
groups of adolescents and youth. A central part of the strategy will be to build
capacities to deliver youth-friendly services by incorporating a peer educator
network. Behavioural change and rights-based approaches will be promoted through
alliances with CBOs and community leaders, including religious leaders, in order to
reach vulnerable and high-risk adolescents.

8

36. This component will be implemented with the national HIV/AIDS committee,
headed by the Ministry of Health and consisting of relevant governmental
institutions and NGOs, in close partnership with UNFPA and WHO. NGOs such as
the Syrian Family Planning Association and Syrian Red Crescent will be the main
implementers for outreach and voluntary and confidential counselling and testing
centres.
37. This programme is expected to be essentially funded with other resources. The
Syrian Arab Republic has a national commitment and a good track record in terms
of pioneering new approaches in the region, and it is expected this will result in
successful linkages with global initiatives.
38. The goal of the child protection programme will be to build a protective
environment for children through the development of knowledge, legislation,
systems and capacities of the Government and civil society. The programme will
focus on three areas (a) child abuse, neglect, violence and exploitation; (b) children
in conflict with the law; and (c) children deprived of primary caregivers. Knowledge
and information systems about these areas will be developed and updated regularly.
Information and analysis will be disseminated to support the legislative reform
process and identify capacity gaps. Monitoring systems will be developed for child
protection programmes. A comprehensive legal framework will be established,
supported by quality research and analysis. Adapted training programmes will be
designed and implemented to address gaps identified through capacity analysis by
partners.
39. To ensure that comprehensive solutions and reforms are formulated and
enacted, the programme will seek extensive participation from children and women
(“claim holders”) as well as coordination among all those responsible for ensuring
children’s rights (“duty bearers”). Concrete measures will be supported to
strengthen the knowledge base on violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of
children and to disseminate this information to decision makers and the public. In
support of the legal framework and system reform, the programme will provide
technical support, expertise and concrete opportunities for practitioners to build
knowledge from other countries both in and outside the region.
40. Essential partners will be the Syrian Commission for Family Affairs, the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour, the Ministry of Justice, ILO, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), NGOs and such CBOs as SOS
Children’s Village, Syrian Red Crescent and Movimondo.
41. About one third of all funds needed for this programme will be other
resources. Several bilateral donors have expressed renewed interest in funding this
component and the increased involvement of the private sector is also envisaged.
42. The policy, advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights programme
aims at building a strong knowledge base in support of decision-making, through
research programmes focused on children and women’s rights that will provide data
disaggregated by geographic location and gender, and quality social and economical
analysis. Functioning systems will be put in place for participation of civil society,
children and adolescents in the development of public policies, planning and
programmes.
43. The programme will help to strengthen the capacities of partners to ensure
quality data collection and social and economical analysis by supporting studies and

providing technical assistance. It will assist relevant government institutions and
NGOs in monitoring progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and other
international commitments such as the Convention on the Right of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women.
Through support to civil society and the creation of opportunities for policy
dialogue, the programme will make sure that people’s voices are heard in the
decision-making process. To achieve this goal, inclusive and participatory systems
will be put in place, focusing on children and adolescents. The State Planning
Commission, the Syrian Commission for Family Affairs and the Central Bureau of
Statistics will be the main government partners. UNDP, research institutes, NGOs
and CBOs will also play a role in this programme.
44. Cross-sectoral costs will cover staff salaries and entitlements and other
recurrent costs such as office rent, information technology, telecommunications and
security costs.
Major partnerships
45. In order to achieve the UNDAF outcomes, cooperation will continue with
United Nations agencies, particularly the Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations, UNDP, UNFPA, WFP and WHO, leading to joint programmes
whenever feasible. UNICEF will also coordinate with and seek the involvement of
international development partners present in the Syrian Arab Republic.
46. UNICEF will work closely with the Syrian Government, in particular the State
Planning Commission, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social
Affairs and Labour, Ministry of Information, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of
Interior, Ministry of Local Administration, Ministry of Al Awqaf and Religious
Affairs, Ministry of Culture, the Syrian Commission for Family Affairs and the
Central Bureau of Statistics.
47. The country programme will engage in partnerships at three levels. First,
grass-roots interaction with local communities, NGOs, CBOs, and unions is a key
strategy integrated in each programme component. This will assist in identifying
gaps and opportunities, monitoring progress and ensuring ownership and
sustainability. The second level is civil society, including NGOs, young people,
media, academia and the private sector, as key stake holders in the context of social
transformation processes and in developing innovations and strengthening social
safety nets. It is particularly important to enhance the capacities and participation of
these groups for analysis, design and implementation of interventions. The last level
is government partners that work with children’s issues, with the State Planning
Commission as the main coordinator to follow up planning and implementation and
the Syrian Commission for Family Affairs as a major advocate and coordinator with
oversight functions for child rights. The focus will be on capacity-building in child
rights, programme management and reporting. Monitoring the situation of children
and women and disseminating this information will be an ongoing process involving
all partners. To strengthen partnerships and ensure ownership, the programme will
also endeavour to introduce innovative participatory processes that facilitate
building consensus on strategies for change.

10

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
48. The key indicators for tracking progress towards the goals of the country
programme include children’s vaccination rates; the percentage of exclusive
breastfeeding up to age six months; the utilization rate of maternal health services;
school drop-out rates; the percentage of the most vulnerable adolescents provided
with information, skills and services to improve their life skills and reduce their
vulnerability to HIV/AIDS; and the percentage of staff familiar with appropriate
treatment of children in conflict with the law, as well as number of laws and policies
taking into account studies and research on children and women. A five-year
integrated monitoring and evaluation plan will be developed to outline monitoring
systems, evaluation and research plans for the country programme. Monitoring and
evaluation will be sustained through regular field visits, annual reviews and specific
sectoral evaluations.
49. Regarding the UNDAF, the respective taskforces will ensure regular
monitoring of programmes and that joint evaluations are conducted. The results will
be shared by all partners and taken into account at annual reviews. DevInfo will be
used to monitor the results of the UNDAF and the country programme, as well as
overall progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. At least one yearly
joint monitoring visit is proposed to follow up the progress of the UNDAF at a local
level. Decentralized monitoring will also be conducted by such partners as local
planning offices and NGOs. An UNDAF evaluation will take place in 2010 to feed
into the planning process of the subsequent cycle. Within UNICEF,
recommendations and lessons learned from all evaluations will be shared with all
concerned partners and followed up by the country management team.
50. The State Planning Commission is the main national body for coordinating the
implementation of the UNDAF and will, together with the Central Bureau of
Statistic, ensure follow up on national monitoring initiatives such as reporting on the
Millennium Development Goals (a database will be established in 2006 for this
purpose) in collaboration with the UNDAF technical committee. The Central Bureau
of Statistics will be strengthened and two “observatories” will be established, on
poverty and on competitiveness.

