E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Tajikistan
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Tajikistan is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comment. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate
indicative budget of $13,645,000 from regular resources, subject to the availability of
funds, and $23,690,000 in other resources, subject to the availability of specific purpose contributions, for the period 2016-2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

Programme rationale
1. Tajikistan is the only-low income country in the Central and Eastern Europe and the
Commonwealth of Independent States region (gross national income [GNI] per capita of
$990 in 2013),1 with an economy heavily reliant on remittances from migrant labourers (47.5
percent of gross domestic product [GDP]).2 This makes the country and its children, who
represent over 42 percent of the population, vulnerable to external shocks, such as the global
crisis of 2008 and the recent depreciation of the Russian rouble.
2. While overall income poverty has fallen significantly, from 96 per cent in 1999 3 to 32
per cent in 2015,4 childhood deprivation remains widespread: a Multiple and Overlapping
Deprivation Analysis based on the 2012 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) shows that
as many as 89 per cent of children aged 0-4 face at least one deprivation, with 35 per cent
suffering from three or more deprivations in the dimensions considered by the study. 5
3. The children of Tajikistan are also highly vulnerable to natural and man-made disasters,
which include frequent earthquakes, mudflows, landslides, floods and internal and external
tensions that pose threats to peace and stability.6 The ability of the Government to respond to
humanitarian crises is limited, and household resilience is constrained partly as result of
widespread labour migration. 7
4. While infant and under-five mortality have declined and are now 41 and 48 per 1,000
live births, respectively,8 for many young children, the right to survival remains at risk, with
significant disparities by wealth and geographical location. Neonatal mortality is stagnating
at 22 per 1,000 live births.9 A 2013 study revealed that the majority of facility-based infant
deaths are preventable. The failure to identify disabilities and developmental delays at an
early stage results in missed opportunities. Based on World Health Organization estimates of
the global prevalence of childhood disability, the number of children with disabilities (CWD)
in Tajikistan is probably much higher than the 26,000 officially registered.
5. A determinant analysis conducted with partners according to the Monitoring Results
for Equity System (MoRES), shows the need to improve the management of childhood
illnesses, perinatal care, capacity of health professionals and the availability of essential
equipment and drugs. An important bottleneck is the low Government spending on health
which, at 1.9 percent of GDP in 2013,10 is leading to high out-of-pocket expenditure and
undermining the sustainability of priority programmes in maternal and child health (MCH).
Financial barriers, along with uneven geographical availability of services, result in persistent
inequity in access to health care. Shortfalls in State funding and insufficient MCH

1

GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$), 2013 - http://data.worldbank.org/country/tajikistan.
Personal remittances, received (percentage of GDP), 2012:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.TRF.PWKR.DT.GD.ZS.
3
Based on a country-specific poverty line: http://data.worldbank.org/country/tajikistan.
4
Government of Tajikistan statistics (TAJSTAT). Продовольственная безопасность и бедность №3 –
Агентство по статистике при Президенте Республики Таджикистан, 2014:
http://stat.tj/ru/img/f847a858478260b1abcc6681d6a07473_1419327489.pdf
5
Dimensions: Health, Nutrition, Education, Child Protection, Water, Sanitation, Housing, Information.
6
Central Asia Multi-Hazard Risk Report. Maplecroft, 2014.
7
The Impact of Labour Migration on Children and Families Left Behind. UNICEF, 2011.
8
Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, at
http://www.childmortality.org/index.php?r=site/graph#ID=TJK_Tajikistan
9
Ibid.
10
Ministry of Health and Social Protection of the Population (MoHSPP).
2

2/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

management capacities, particularly at the subnational level, also affect the quality of care.
The polio outbreak in 2010 was an indication of such gaps in the health system.
6. The prevalence of malnutrition among under 5 children remains high, at 26 per cent
forchronic and 10 per cent for acute cases; boys and girls are equally affected. Many women
and children also suffer from micronutrient deficiencies, particularly high rates of anaemia
and iodine deficiency. Only 39 per cent of households consume adequately iodized salt. 11 A
2012 study estimated that malnutrition costs Tajikistan $41 million annually in economic
losses, most of which could be prevented through cost-effective interventions, such as
universal salt iodization, promotion of good child feeding practices and management of
severe acute malnutrition.12
7. At the end of 2013, there were 365 children confirmed as having HIV. There is concern
about the rising number of women and children infected and the increasing proportion of
cases transmitted sexually or without known cause of infection. Tajikistan is also a highburden country for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (TB), with high TB/HIV co-morbidity.
TB is indeed a major but often unrecognized cause of disease and death among children.
8. Children are not receiving sufficient support for early learning and school readiness in
the home environment. Pre-primary education is not compulsory and access is extremely
limited: the net enrolment rate (ages 3-6) was 11 per cent in 2014, the lowest in the region.
Enrolment remains biased towards children from urban and wealthier families.
9. Regarding education, out of school children included 3.9 per cent of those 7-10 years
old (as of 2014), and 5.7 per cent of those 11-15 years old (as of 2011).13 At lower secondary
level, 9.1 per cent of girls were out of school, compared to 2.4 percent of boys. 14 CWD are
among the most marginalized, with only 19 per cent of those 7-18 years old attending
mainstream schools.15
10. While the Government has initiated curriculum reform to shift the focus from
knowledge to competencies and mainstreaming life skills-based education, learning
achievement needs improvement: reading comprehension is low in early grades,16 and there
is also no systematic measurement of learning outcomes.
11. Adolescents have huge potential to contribute to development but face significant
challenges, including the fact that public services are of poor quality and are not tailored to
their needs. Perceiving education to be of limited relevance and faced with its poor quality,
a significant number of children do not continue beyond the compulsory grades 1-9.
Adolescents have challenges in accessing health services that are unaffordable, have low
quality and are not ‘youth-friendly’. Children’s limited life skills, leave them ill-prepared for
their future, including as parents. Livelihood options are limited for young people,

11

DHS, 2012.
Situation Analysis - Improving economic outcomes by expanding nutrition programming in
Tajikistan. World Bank/UNICEF, 2012.
13
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics,
2015, at http://data.uis.unesco.org/
14 UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2015, at http://data.uis.unesco.org/
15 Ministry of Education and Science, Education Management Information System (2014) and
MoHSPP Data on Registered Persons with Disabilities (2013).
16 United States Agency for International Development, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan Early Grade
Reading Review, 2011, at
http://www.gem2.org/sites/default/files/Early%20Reading%20Report_FINAL%20draft%2011232
011.pdf
12

3/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

particularly women, ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities. As a result, many boys
see labour migration as their only option, while many girls focus on marriage and
motherhood, thereby contributing to high levels of early marriage and pregnancies.
12. There is an apparent increase in the number of suicides among young people. The
estimated average yearly rate for the Sughd Region, for example, is 13.4 per 100,000 for girls
and 10.9 for boys aged 12–24. Identified determinants include domestic violence, loss of a
loved one and unjust blame. In addition, mental health services are underdeveloped, with no
specialized services for young people.17
13. The voices of adolescents go largely unheard in public and in private domains,
particularly for girls. Rights awareness and political participation are limited. Corruption in
service delivery is a big concern for adolescents. 18 Youth in Tajikistan face higher rates of
illiteracy and unemployment, and poorer health than did the previous generation. Lack of
opportunities and limited space for participation in decision-making place youth at risk.
14. Children do not yet benefit from an integrated, comprehensive social protection system
comprising complementary benefits and services. Benefits are small, poorly targeted,
inefficiently managed and limited in coverage, reaching only 11per cent of poor households.
Social assistance accounts for only 0.5 percent of GDP, the lowest level in the region. 19 Key
bottlenecks include the fact that services that are patchy and reach only a fraction of those
eligible,20 and community-based services and the social work profession are poorly
developed. At the same time, inadequate social protection increases the risk of
institutionalization for CWD and children from poor families.
15. The number of children in residential care institutions has changed little, with an
estimated 278 children under three institutionalized as of February 2013. A 2014 rapid
assessment showed that the vast majority of children in institutions were placed there because
of economic or social determinants. CWD and girls are more likely than others to be
institutionalized. Key bottlenecks in the child protection system relate to identification,
assessment, referral and gate-keeping systems, and case management.
16. Juvenile offending increased from 625 cases in 2012 to 800 cases in 2014,21 but the
number of convicted juveniles declined from 504 to 441 in the same period. 22 However, the
number of juveniles serving prison sentences has grown since 2012, despite the fact that most
crimes are property-related and committed by first-time offenders. The number of children
referred to juvenile justice alternatives remains small. Children in conflict with the law are at
risk of ill-treatment, particularly during arrest and initial inquiry.
17. A key lesson learned during the 2010-2015 country programme was that the rights areas
covered were too broad, while the geographical targeting was overly narrow. The programme
focused on priority districts with high levels of childhood deprivation, with the aim of
delivering results for disadvantaged children by integrating child rights into local planning

17

UNICEF, Study on Prevalence and Dynamics of Suicide among Children and Young People (12-24
years of age) in Sughd Region, Tajikistan, 2013, at
http://www.unicef.org/tajikistan/Suicide_Study_Report_for_WEB_ENG(1).pdf.
18The Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Tajikistan, 2013.
19 World Bank, Analysis of the Safety Nets in Tajikistan, 2014.
20 European Union, 2012.
21 Government of Tajikistan Ministry of the Interior, 2014.
22 Government of Tajikistan Ministry of Justice, 2014.

4/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

processes, strengthening local capacity to monitor child rights and modeling innovations for
national scale-up. This strategy was not entirely successful. Given the limited resources,
delivering demonstrable results for children across a range of child rights indicators proved
too ambitious. In addition, focusing programme implementation on a limited number of
districts did not do justice to the wide geographical variation in childhood deprivations. The
2016-2020 country programme will continue to work at district level to model innovations
and respond to specific childhood deprivations, but will not focus the entire country
programme on select priority districts.
18. The midterm review of the 2010-2015 country programme concluded that the
programme’s approach to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in schools had significant
shortcomings in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability, and that it did not
succeed in establishing an affordable model for WASH infrastructure viable for national
scale-up. The support for construction and supplies in WASH in schools was thus
discontinued, and the programme re-focused on promoting hygiene-related life skills.
19. The MTR also concluded that a sectorally focused results framework could inhibit the
cross-sectoral linkages required to deliver results. Therefore, the 2016-2020 country
programme will take a life-cycle approach, to ensure that child rights in different phases of
childhood are promoted in a holistic manner.
20. The 2010-2015 country programme also revealed the importance of addressing child
rights issues for adolescents, who have enormous potential to contribute to the realization of
child rights, as demonstrated through youth-led studies and communication for social change.
Therefore, rights issues for adolescents will be addressed comprehensively and youth
participation pursued as a central programme strategy.

Programme priorities and partnerships
21. The overall aim of the country programme is to accelerate progress towards the
realization of the rights of all children, with special attention given to closing equity gaps at
different stages of the life cycle. UNICEF will share its expertise with both the Government
of Tajikistan and civil society to support efforts to implement the Concluding Observations
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, as well as efforts towards ratification and implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
22. The new country programme is aligned with key Government of Tajikistan policies and
strategies, in particular the National Development Strategy, the Living Standards
Improvement Strategy and relevant sector strategies and policies. The programme of
cooperation is anchored in the 2016-2020 three thematic areas of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and contributes directly to five of the six
UNDAF outcomes. The programme results are also aligned with the UNICEF Strategic Plan
and Gender Action Plan for 2014-2017 and will contribute to the post-2015 Sustainable
Development Goals.
Surviving and thriving in the early years
23. The first programme component will focus on ensuring the best possible start in life for
children. It will aim to increase quality coverage of high-impact, evidence-based health,
nutrition and early childhood development interventions that allow children to survive and to
develop socially, emotionally, physically and intellectually. The programme will pay special

5/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

attention to the first 1,000 days, which have lifelong implications. This component will
promote children’s rights to survival and development, to health, including being born free
of HIV, and to comprehensive well-being. It will aim to reduce equity gaps for children in
underserved areas and CWD.
24. Key bottlenecks mentioned above, which threaten to hamper child survival and
development in the early years, are insufficient allocation of public finances and
inefficiencies in public expenditure. This programme component will strengthen equityfocused planning, budgeting and public financial management in favour of essential maternal
and child and newborn health, nutrition, immunization, and other early childhood
development interventions. UNICEF will play a brokering role among the Government,
United Nations agencies and civil society to contribute to health sector financial reform,
aiming for sustained gains toward universal health coverage.
25. A second set of bottlenecks relates to the willingness and ability of caregivers and
communities to adopt healthy behaviours and appropriate nutrition and care practices, as well
the capacity of policymakers and service providers to create an enabling environment for this.
This programme component, in collaboration with the media and civil society, will support
caregivers and communities to improve infant and young child feeding and maternal nutrition
practices, immunization uptake, treatment of childhood illnesses and early care for child
development. The capacity of front-line service providers will be strengthened. Special
attention will be given to CWD, children living with HIV and tuberculosis, and children in
remote rural areas. Communication for social change will help in addressing social norms,
practices and beliefs that hinder child-friendly behaviours and practices.
26. The third bottleneck is the quality of maternal, newborn and child health services. The
new country programme will continue to contribute to improving the quality of care, through
technical assistance and capacity-building. This entails strengthened infection control in
maternal, neonatal and child health services, system-strengthening for immunization services
and greater accountability in service provision. In addition, this programme component will
aim to improve the capacity of the Government, public oversight bodies and civil society to
strengthen the voice of parents, caregivers and children in demanding quality services. This
will enhance quality assurance as well as transparency and accountability for service
delivery.
27. The fourth bottleneck relates to multi-sectoral coordination, essential for early
childhood development. This programme component will continue to support the
Government in strengthening the inter-sectoral coordination mechanism, within the
framework of the SUN (Scaling Up Nutrition) movement, and to promote a multidisciplinary approach to early childhood development that is focused on the child and family.
Inclusive, quality learning
28. In the 2010-2015 country programme, remarkable progress was achieved in early
childhood education (ECE), through development of an alternative ECE model, which was
adopted by the Government and is being replicated, with the aim to double enrolment and
reach 25 per cent of children 3-6 years old by 2020. UNICEF will support the Government
to reach this goal, by leveraging resources for ECE and maintaining a quality and an equity
focus in access. This is crucial since, even once Government plans are achieved by 2020,
three quarters of children 3-6 years old will still not be enroled in ECE centres. This
programme component will contribute to fulfilling the rights of children to early learning and
an inclusive quality education, with a particular focus on girls, CWD and children from poor

6/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

families. UNICEF will work with key duty bearers to build capacity for the promotion and
provision of alternative early learning opportunities, including in the home environment,
while monitoring and promoting their equity focus.
29. While enrolment levels in basic education are high overall, a number of children are
either out of school or at risk of dropping out. Lack of access to education, therefore, is a
bottleneck that needs continued attention. During the previous country programme, data
collection and advocacy helped to gain greater recognition of this issue. The new country
programme will build on these achievements to identify children who are out of school or at
risk of dropping out, and facilitate appropriate measures by education authorities and parents.
UNICEF will work with partners to develop accelerated-learning solutions for children out
of school or at risk of dropping out. Communication for social change strategies will address
social norms that undermine the enrolment of CWD and the transition of girls to education
levels beyond the compulsory grades.
30. This programme component will also continue to support improved quality of
education, building on ongoing efforts to strengthen pre-service training of educators to
promote learner-centred teaching and to support an inclusive education system. Efforts will
support the national learning outcomes assessment system, based on the best international
standards. The programme will assist the Government in the planned transition to a 12-year
education system, including the associated curriculum reform. UNICEF will continue its
work with the Ministry of Education and Science to strengthen evidence-based policy and
planning.
Full participation of adolescents
31. The third component aims to unlock the potential of adolescents, by empowering them
to participate fully in all aspects of life. It will involve adolescents in their becoming change
makers, promoting an inclusive, tolerant and peaceful society, and will promote the right to
a ‘second chance’ for children in the second decade of their lives.
32. Full participation of adolescents, including those from ethnic minorities and those with
disabilities, with HIV, or with a history of conflict with the law, is hindered by social norms
that discourage children and youth from having their own opinions and expressing
themselves openly. Adolescent girls face even stronger obstacles to their participation. This
programme will enable the Government and civil society to involve adolescents in promoting
social norms for a peaceful, tolerant and inclusive society.
33. This component will also address a second bottleneck concerning the ability of
adolescents to demand and access information and youth-friendly services. It will support
national and local government institutions and civil society to promote rights awareness and
life skills development, and will continue to support the expansion of service provision for
and with adolescents, building on the successful model of Youth-Friendly Health Services.
At the same time, it will promote development of psychosocial services for adolescents,
including suicide prevention.
34. Finally, this programme will work with the national and local government institutions
and civil society so that adolescents’ needs and priorities can be better addressed in nationaland local- level policy and budgeting processes. This will include creating opportunities for
adolescents, including the most disadvantaged, to be heard in these processes.

7/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

Protective environment for children
35. The final programme component recognizes the fact that children face various kinds of
risk and vulnerability at all stages of their childhood. There is a need to build a protective
environment that prevents and responds to deprivation, violence, abuse, exploitation and
neglect, especially for the most vulnerable. In doing so, the programme will contribute to
fulfilling children’s rights to a supportive and caring family environment, access to justice
and adequate social protection.
36. At system level, this component will contribute to strengthening the policy and legal
framework for child protection and social protection, providing technical assistance to basing
the development and implementation of relevant laws, policies and strategies firmly on
evidence and bringing them in line with international standards. Working with the
Government and civil society at national and local levels, it will strengthen evidence-based,
equitable resource allocation and promote stronger inter-sectoral coordination towards an
improved protective environment. UNICEF will contribute to efforts to design an integrated
social protection system and demonstrate its feasibility and relevance. This will include
revision of existing services and benefits as well as the introduction of new evidence-based
and equity-focused models of services. The programme will work towards a child protection
system with better identified roles and responsibilities, a strengthened gatekeeping
mechanism, as well as improved capacity for assuring the availability of, and accessibility
to, quality services.
37. Children are often exposed to risk and vulnerability and left unprotected because of
social norms and harmful practices and beliefs. These include the perception of CWD as
bringing shame and burdens to their families and society; and the tolerance of physical
punishment of children and violence against women and girls. This programme’s focus on
innovative communication for social change will help to overcome these barriers.
38. Given the high vulnerability of the children of Tajikistan to the impact of natural
disasters and climate change, disaster risk reduction will be mainstreamed throughout the
programme. Humanitarian response will be programmed under each outcome, as required.
The environmental impact of all programme interventions will be closely scrutinized, and
mitigating measures will be taken whenever required.
39. The country programme will be implemented in close collaboration with central and
local government. Partnerships will be forged with civil society organizations, particularly
those that are led by, or working for, youth. UNICEF will work closely with sister United
Nations agencies under the governance structure of the UNDAF. UNICEF will continue to
play an important role in the broader development partnerships and humanitarian
coordination efforts. New and strengthened partnerships will be explored with the private
sector and academia, while collaboration with the media will be enhanced.
Cross-sectoral
40. The results and resources framework of the new country programme is organized
around rights issues that affect children at three stages of the life cycle, while considering
risk and vulnerability faced throughout childhood. The programme will adopt a mix of
mutually reinforcing programme strategies: communication for social change; advocacy and
communication for child rights and equity; strengthening national capacity and systems for
data collection and analysis and for child rights monitoring; innovation; sustained, systemwide capacity-building for the equitable delivery of services; youth participation; and disaster

8/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

risk reduction and emergency preparedness. Given that Tajikistan remains a low-income
country with persistent capacity constraints, the programme will support delivery of
improved quality of services.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Surviving and thriving in the early years

3 730

8 000

11 730

Inclusive, quality learning

2 635

6 190

8 825

Full participation of adolescents

1 975

3 500

5 475

Protective environment for children

3 805

5 500

9 305

Cross-sectoral

1 500

500

2 000

13 645

23 690

37 335

Total

Programme and risk management
41. This CPD outlines UNICEF contributions to results for children. It serves as the primary
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to
the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal controls framework.
42. The main risks to country programme implementation are inefficient use of resources;
hazards that threaten business continuity and sustained progress towards results; the inability
to mobilize sufficient partners’ resources due to the possibility of declining donor interest in
Tajikistan, challenges in advocating for an increase in Government budget allocations for
social services, and the mounting impact of the economic crisis in the region. An integral part
of all relevant programmatic interventions will be stronger policy dialogue, advocacy and
capacity-building for budgeting, sustainable public financing and costing of reforms and
strategies benefiting children. UNICEF will conscientiously implement the policy on the
harmonized approach to cash transfers, while working closely with other United Nations
agencies to strengthen assurance activities. Building on success in recent years in working
with partners, UNICEF will continue strengthening its emergency preparedness and response
readiness and will further diversify its portfolio of funding partners to mitigate the risk of
declining donor interest.

Monitoring and evaluation
43. The lack of timely and disaggregated data of good quality is a constraint for the
equitable fulfilment of child rights. The country programme of cooperation will continue to
support strengthening registration and national data systems for child rights monitoring, with
a focus on tracking equity gaps and real-time monitoring of the impact of shocks. Capacity
to analyse, interpret and take action on evidence remains weak. Across all programme
outcomes, strengthening capacity for evidence-based decision-making will be a priority. The

9/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

UNDAF offers opportunities for coordinated United Nations action to strengthen monitoring
and evaluation systems. As noted in the costed evaluation plan, at least one evaluation is
planned for each programme component, carried out jointly with the Government, where
appropriate.

10/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

Annex
Results and resources framework
Tajikistan-UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Relevant Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: 6, 14, 15, 19, 19.1, 23, 24, 26.1, 28, 29
National priorities: Development of human potential aimed primarily at increasing the quantity and quality of social services for the poor and achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, expanding public participation in the development process and strengthening social partnerships (National Development
Strategy (NDS), Living Standards Improvement Strategy (LSIS) and sector strategies).
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) OUTCOMES INVOLVING UNICEF:
Outcome 1: People in Tajikistan have their rights protected and benefit from improved access to justice and quality services delivered by accountable,
transparent, and gender-responsive legislative, executive and judicial institutions at all levels.
Indicator: 1.9 Progress in implementation of the Judicial and Legal Reform Programme
Outcome 3: People in Tajikistan benefit from quality, equitable and inclusive health, education and social protection systems
Indicators: 3.1. Net enrolment ratio (NER) in primary education, children between the ages of 36-59 months
 3.2. Transition rate from lower secondary to secondary general education, by sex (Grade 9 to Grade 10)
 3.3. Percentage of children, aged 7-15, with registered disabilities attending mainstream schools
 3.4. Out-of-school rate for adolescents of lower-secondary school age, by sex.
 3.6. Percentage of GDP for public health expenditure
 3.7. Neonatal mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
 3.8. Under-five child mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
 3.9. Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births) (disaggregated by wealth quintiles and region)
 3.12.Percentage of HIV-positive pregnant women who receive antiretrovirals to reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission
 3.14 Percentage of young women/men aged 15–24 who correctly identify ways to prevent sexual transmission of HIV and reject major
misconceptions about HIV transmission
 3.15.Percentage of adults and children with HIV known to be on treatment 12 months after initiation of antiretroviral therapy.
 3.17. Percentage of planned state budget expenditure on social protection (to be disaggregated by type of social protection)
 3.18. Number of CWD receiving social pensions
Outcome 4: The nutritional status of the people in Tajikistan is improved through stable access to sufficient, appropriate and safe food, improved child
feeding practices, better water and sanitation and improved access to quality health care
Indicators:
 4.1. The prevalence of stunting, wasting, underweight among children under age 5
 4.2. Exclusive breastfeeding rate among children under 6 months
 4.3. Prevalence of anaemia among women of reproductive age (15-49)
 4.4. Level of anaemia among children (6-59 months)
 4.5. Percentage of households consuming adequately iodized salt

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

 4.6. Proportion of children aged 0-59 months with diarrhoea receiving oral rehydration therapy and zinc
Outcome 5: Women, youth, children, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups are protected from violence and discrimination, have a voice that is
heard and are respected as equal members of society
Indicator: 5.4 Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by the Government of Tajikistan
Outcome 6: People in Tajikistan are more resilient to natural and man-made disasters and benefit from improved policy and operational frameworks for
environmental protection and sustainable management of natural resources
Indicator: 6.11. Proportion of rural communities with increased capacity to manage shocks and risks
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcomes: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7
UNICEF
country
programme
outcomes
1. More
children,
including the
most
marginalized
, are
surviving,
healthy, well
nourished
and
developing
to their full
potential in
their early
years, with
focus on the
first 1,000
days.

12/17

Key progress indicators, baselines and
targets

Neonatal mortality rate (per 1,000 live births,
UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 22 (2013)
Target: 16 (2020)

Under-five child mortality rate (per 1,000 live
births, UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 48 (2013)
Target: 25 (2020)
The share of the budget requirement for
vaccines and related devices covered by the
Government
Baseline: 20% (2014)
Target: 50% (2019)
% of last births with a postnatal check-up by
skilled health providers within one week after
delivery
Baseline: 61% (total), 66% (Born in health
facility), 47% (Born elsewhere (2012)
Target: 80% (2018)

Means of
verification

Inter-agency
Group for Child
Mortality
Estimation
(IGME)

IGME

MoHSPP
administrative
data

Demographic
and Health
Survey,
/Multiple

Indicative country
programme outputs

1.More pregnant
women and children
benefit from
Government’s
increased, efficient,
transparent and
equitable budget
allocation and
utilization regarding
maternal and child
health and nutrition
interventions
2. Caregivers and
communities are
supported to adopt
healthy behaviours
and appropriate
nutrition and care
practices for all
children, including
children with
disabilities, HIV and

Major
partners,
partnership
frameworks
Ministry of
Health and
Social
Protection of
the Population
(MoHSPP),
other relevant
state
institutions,
civil society
WHO, UNFPA,
UNAIDS,
WFP, FAO,
UNDP

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome (in thousands of
United States dollars)
RR

OR

Total

3 730

8 000

11 730

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

Indicator Cluster
Survey,
MoHSPP

TB, with special
attention to the first
1,000 days
3. Parents, caregivers
and children demand
and benefit from
improved quality of
maternal, newborn
and child health care
services, in
accordance with
international
standards, including
during emergencies

Prevalence of stunting (S), wasting (W),
underweight (U) among children under 5
(UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: S 26%; W 10%;U 12% (2012)
Target: S 20%; W 7%; U 8% (2018)
Level of anaemia among children aged 6-59
Baseline: 29% (2009) (UNDAF indicator)
Target: 25% (2018)

DHS/Nutrition
survey

4. Government’s
capacity to coordinate
and manage multisectoral nutrition and
early childhood
interventions is
strengthened

DHS/Nutrition
survey

DHS/Nutrition
survey

Prevalence of anaemia among women of
reproductive age (15-49) (UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 24% (2009)
Target: 16% (2018)
% of HIV positive pregnant women who
receive antiretrovirals to reduce the risk of

Country AIDS
response

13/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

2. All
children
have
improved
access to
quality
inclusive
education,
from early
learning to
secondary
education,
particularly
those who
are most
marginalized
.

mother-to-child transmission of HIV during
the last 12 months (UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 31.9% (2013)
Target: 80% (2019)

progress
reporting

Net enrolment ratio in pre-primary education,
children aged 36-71 months (UNDAF
indicator)
Baseline: 10% girls / 12% boys (2014)
Target: 25% (2020)

Education
Management
Information
System, (EMIS),
other State
statistics data

Transition rate from lower secondary to
secondary general education (Grade 9 to
Grade 10, UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 75% girls / 77% boys (2014)
Target: 85% (2020)
% of children aged 7–15 with registered
disabilities attending mainstream schools
(UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 19% (2013)
Target: 40% (2020)
Out-of-school rate for adolescents of lowersecondary school age (UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 9.1% girls / 2.4% boys (2011)
Target: 2% (2020)
% of parents of children without disability
who consider it acceptable that their children
attend classes together with CWD
Baseline: TBD (2016)
Target: TBD (2019)

14/17

Knowledge,
Attitudes,
Beliefs and
Practices Survey
(KABP)

1. More children aged
3-6 years benefit from
increased capacity of
government, partners,
communities, and
caregivers as duty
bearers to provide
and promote early
learning
2. More children
demand and benefit
from an increased
political commitment,
national capacity, and
accountability to
adequately
programme to
improve access and
participation to
complete preschool
and basic education,
and transition to
further education, in
an equitable
environment
3. All children benefit
from improved
capacity at the
national level to
legislate and plan for
strengthening of
education to realize

Ministry of
Education and
Science; other
relevant State
institutions,
civil society
UNDP,
UNFPA, UNWOMEN,
OHCHR,
UNHCR, ILO,
OSCE, World
Bank, USAID,
European
Union (EU),
German
Development
Institute (GIZ),
Aga Khan
Institute, Open
Society
Institute

2 635

6 190

8 825

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

quality learning in a
safe and inclusive
environment
3. Adolesce
nts,
including the
most
marginalized
, are
recognized
as equal
members of
society and
empowered
to
participate
meaningfully
in all aspects
of life

% of adolescents (10-19 years old), who
strongly agree that they can resist negative
pressure from their peers and seniors
Baseline: Total, Male, Female (TBD)
Target: Total, Male, Female (TBD)
% of adolescents, who report that they are
involved in family and community decisions
on matters that concern them
Baseline: Total, Male, Female (TBD)
Target: Total, Male, Female (TBD)
% of adolescents, , who report that they are
involved in local government decisions on
matters that concern them
Baseline: Total, Male, Female, CWD, ethnic
minorities (TBD)
Target: Total, Male, Female, CWD, ethnic
minorities (TBD)
% of adolescents, including those who face
stigmatization and discrimination. who know
where and how to access youth-friendly
services
Baseline: Total, Male, Female (TBD)
Target: Total, Male, Female (TBD)

State statistics
data;
As this is a new
programming
area, new data
tools will be
developed with
Government to
determine
baselines and
track progress.
Targets will be
set once the
baseline is
developed

1.The normative
framework and
budget for
adolescents, especially
for the marginalized,
is improved to
promote the
realization of their
rights to information,
quality services and
participation in
matters concerning
their lives

Committee on
Youth, Sports
and Tourism,
other relevant
State
institutions,
civil society

1 975

3 500

5 475

WHO, UNFPA,
UN-WOMEN,
UNAIDS,
UNDP

2.Adolescents,
including the most
marginalized, demand
and have access to
quality youth-friendly
information, services
and capacity
development
3.Social norms shift in
favor of the increased
participation and
voice of all
adolescents, with a
special focus on the
most marginalized

15/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

4. Children
who are
most at risk
benefit from
a better
functioning
protective
environmen
t that
prevents
and
responds to
deprivation,
violence,
abuse,
exploitation
and neglect

% distribution of children in formal care by
type of care (residential care vs. family-type
care), at the end of the year
Baseline: 84%/16% (2013)Male, Female,
CWD (TBD)
Target: 77%/23% (2020) Male, Female,
CWD (TBD)

State statistics
data
World Bank

Number of CWD in residential care
(disaggregated by sex)
Baseline: 2,493 (2013) Male, Female (TBD)
Target: 1,653 (2020) Male, Female (TBD)
Number of children in contact with law
diverted to alternative community based
support during the year
Baseline: 99 (2013) Male, Female (TBD)
Target: 200 (2020) Male, Female (TBD)
Number of CWD receiving community care
service during the year
Baseline: 240 (2014) Male, Female (TBD)
Target: 1000 (2020) Male, Female (TBD)
Percentage of parents who consider physical
punishment of their children acceptable under
given circumstances
Baseline: TBD (2016)
Target: TBD (2019)
Number of CWD receiving social pensions
(UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: Total: 26,000 (2014), Male, Female
(TBD)
Target: Total: 35,000 (2020), Male, Female
(TBD)

16/17

TRANSMONEE

KABP Survey

1. Children benefit
from an improved
protection system
based on a policy and
legal framework in
line with international
standards, adequately
resourced by
evidence-based,
equitable resource
allocation and
executed through
strong inter-sectoral
coordination at
central and local
levels
2. National and local
authorities
increasingly ensure
availability and
accessibility of quality
child protection
services and social
benefits, including
during emergencies,
for children most at
risk and their families
3. Social norms shift
in favour of better
protection and
inclusion of the most
marginalized children

Commission on
the rights of the
child, other
relevant State
institutions,
civil society

UNDP, WHO,
UNFPA, UNWOMEN,
OHCHR,
UNHCR, ILO,
USAID, EU,
Swiss
Development
Cooperation,
GIZ, Japan
International
Cooperation
Agency

3 805

5 500

9 305

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.17

% of planned state budget expenditure on
social protection (to be disaggregated by type
of social protection) (UNDAF indicator)
Baseline: 18,6% (2015)
Target: 22% (2020)
5.

Crosssectoral

Effective development, planning,
coordination, delivery and monitoring
of country programme results

Periodic
reviews and
evaluations of
programme
components

Totals

Guidance, tools and
resources to
effectively design
and manage
programmes are
available to
UNICEF and
partners
Strategies to
address crosscutting issues
related to child
rights are
implemented

1 500

500

2 000

13 645

23 690

37 335

_______

17/17

