United Republic of Tanzania
Common country programme document
July 2011-June 2015

The draft common country programme document for the
United Republic of Tanzania (CP/FPA-ICEFWFP/DCCP/2011/TZA/1) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 first regular session (8-11
February 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 annual session of the Executive
Board on 23 June 2011.

Contents
Page

I.

Situation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Past cooperation and lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

III.

Proposed programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

IV.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

1.

UNDP results and resources framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

2.

UNFPA results and resources framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

3.

UNICEF programme of cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36

4.

WFP country programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45

Annexes

2

Introduction
1.
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and the United Nations
country management team agreed that for the July 2011 to June 2015 period, the
United Nations in Tanzania will develop a single United Nations Development
Assistance Plan (UNDAP). This plan is to capture the entire range of activities
supported by the United Nations in Tanzania, including Zanzibar. It integrates the
requirements of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF)
with the country programme documents of four individual organizations — United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World Food Programme
(WFP) — and, particularly, with the country programme actions plans signed by the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania.
2.
The plan builds on lessons learned from the previous UNDAF, the Delivering
as One pilot, including recommendations of the Delivering as One country -led
evaluation (2010). The new approach reduces duplication in planning requirements
for United Nations organizations and partners. It provides a collective, coherent and
strategically focused plan aligned to national priorities articulated in the poverty
reduction strategies for Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar: MKUKUTA II and
MKUZA 2010-15 (the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty and
the Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan). This new approach also encompasses the
national response to the Millennium Development Goals, key sector planning and
policy documents, and the current humanitarian situation.
3.
The assistance plan articulates the precise contribution of the United Nations
to Tanzania’s national development priorities and international commitments,
thereby enhancing transparency as well as accountability to both the Government of
the United Republic of Tanzania and donors. The plan systematically applies the
five programming principles of gender equality, environmental sustainability,
capacity development, a human rights-based approach and results-based
management, and the plan mainstreams relevant cross-cutting issues. The plan
reflects the recommendations of a national-level prioritization processes involving
the Tanzanian Government, development partners, civil society organizations, and
all resident and non-resident United Nations organizations in Tanzania.
4.
To further simplify the programming processes of the four organizations —
UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP — the Tanzanian Government proposed a
common country programme document to the joint meeting of the Executive Boards
of UNDP/UNFPA and to UNICEF and WFP in January 2010. This document was
based on the assistance plan and in lieu of organization-specific country programme
documents. The Boards of UNDP/UNFPA and UNICEF approved the request at
their respective June 2010 sessions on an exceptional basis. The Bureau of the
Executive Board of the WFP agreed at its 14 September 2010 meeting to align itself
with the decisions of other United Nations funds and programmes with the draft
programme document submitted at the Board’s first regular session of 2011, for
approval at the annual session of 2011. The programme document is in line with: the
United Nations Development Group (UNDG) common framework for the c ountry
programme outline and country programme document; the June 2010 decisions of
the four organizations; and United Nations General Assembly resolution 64/289.

3

I. Situation analysis
5.
Although Tanzania’s economic progress has been significant, achievement of
the first Millennium Development Goal (eradicate extreme poverty and hunger;
ensure full and productive employment and decent work for all) has been elusive.
Despite some deceleration following the global financial crisis in 2008, annual gross
domestic product (GDP) growth since 2001 has been greater than 7 per cent, well
above the sub-Saharan African average. Underlying this success are sharply
improved economic fundamentals resulting from macroeconomic and financial
reforms. The macroeconomy has been steady despite global shocks. Inflation has
been less than 10 per cent for most of the period, moving up to 10.3 per cent in 2008
as a result of food and fuel crises. The exchange rate has been stable on the back of
improved foreign exchange reserves and moderate inflation. Levels of external debt
were reduced from a high of 52.5 per cent in 2003 to 33.1 per cent of GDP in 2008,
with the country benefiting from participation in the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt Initiative. 1
6.
Despite economic growth, income poverty declined only marginally from
35.7 per cent in 2000-2001 to 33.6 per cent in 2007. As the population grew (2.9 per
cent in 2008), the number of poor Tanzanians increased by 1.3 million over the
decade, reaching 12.9 million on the mainland, with vast geographical disparities in
poverty incidence and depth. Such rapid population growth poses challenges for
achieving all of the Millennium Development Goals, including the first one. Growth
occurred in areas where employment generation is low, while employment for the
half a million people entering the labour market each year was in poorly
remunerated agriculture and in the informal sector. This was another driver of
poverty. Although fast-growing, Tanzania’s industrial sector is one of the smallest in
Africa (22.6 per cent by GDP contribution) and adds little to employment creation.
Agriculture, the largest sector, accounts for: one quarter of GDP; 85 per cent of
exports; 80 per cent of the overall employment; and 90 per c ent of the employment
of women.
7.
Tanzania has made little progress towards reducing extreme hunger and
malnutrition. The 2010 Global Hunger Index ranks the situation as ―alarming‖.
Children in rural areas suffer substantially higher rates of malnutrition and chronic
hunger, although urban-rural disparities have narrowed as regards both stunting and
underweight. Food poverty declined from 21.6 per cent in 1991 to 16.6 per cent in
2007. Nationally, the percentage of children under 5 who are underweight hardly
dropped. (The figure was 22 per cent in 2004-2005 and 21 per cent in 2010.) The
absolute number of people affected by chronic hunger remains high. The food
consumption of 4.1 per cent of the households in rural Mainland Tanzania is
considered ―poor‖, and in 18.9 per cent of the households it is ―borderline poor‖.
__________________
1

4

All data for this Situation Analysis section is from: United Republic of Tanzania, Poverty and
Human Development Report 2009; United Republic of Tanzania, Millennium Development
Goals Report Mid-Way Evaluation: 2000-2008; National Bureau of Statistics/ICF Macro,
Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010 Preliminary Report (October 2010); United
Republic of Tanzania, Tanzania Gender Indicators Booklet 2010; Tanzania Commission for
AIDS (TACAIDS), Zanzibar AIDS Commission, National. Bureau of Statistics, Office of the
Chief Government Statistician, Macro International, Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Indicator
Survey 2007-08 (November 2008).

8.
While on a national level Tanzania regularly produces sufficient food for its
requirements, many regions (particularly in central, south-east and north-east
Tanzania) are vulnerable to hunger and food insecurity. Food insecurity results
mainly from insufficient access to food at the household level. This leads in turn to
the adoption of unpromising strategies for responding to such recurrent shocks as
high food prices, drought, pests and diseases. Environmenta l management and
climate-change adaptation among rural producers is inadequate as are the safety nets
that might mitigate the effects of recurring livelihood shocks.
9.
Low rural sector productivity arises mainly from inadequate infrastructure
investment; limited access to farm inputs, extension services and credit; limited
technology as well as trade and marketing support; and heavy dependence on
rain-fed agriculture and natural resources. Despite reform efforts, lasting structural
change has proven elusive. Off-farm employment in the poorly paid informal sector
is rising. Rural private sector and community institutions are undeveloped, further
compounding inefficiencies and service gaps.
10. Tanzania’s fast-growing population of 43 million (which includes 1.3 million
people on Zanzibar) is highly dependent on the environment and natural resources
for its livelihood. Thus unsustainable harvesting of natural resources, water -source
encroachment and unchecked cultivation, coupled with global climate change, po se
challenges both for achieving the Millennium Development Goal related to the
environment and for maintaining any achievements. Resource utilization and
management are stretched with rising demand for: fresh water; food; natural
products; land for crops and grazing; shelter; and wood and charcoal for household
energy. This rising demand contributes to deforestation and environmental
degradation. Illegal fishing threatens the sustainability of the fishing industry.
Access to land resources and demands for various needs, including conservation and
natural resources management, gives rise to conflicts. Capacities for managing
natural resources, including climate-change adaptation and mitigation, are
inadequate to meet the scale of the challenge.
11. Following the abolition of school fees in 2001, increases in primary school
enrolment have been rapid, while pre-primary and secondary education has likewise
shown steady expansion in the last few years. That said, Tanzania ’s progress
towards Millennium Development Goal 2 (achieving universal primary education)
still faces challenges. These include ensuring cohort completion (62.5 per cent in
2008) and education quality. (In 2009 the pupil-to-teacher ratio was quite high:
54:1.) Another challenge is posed by the passing rate for primary school students
who have reached the final level (52.7 per cent passed in 2008). Disparities exist in
access to pre-primary and secondary schools. Residence (urban versus rural),
household wealth and educational background all play a part. Disability, orphaning,
child labour and other forms of vulnerability are additional barriers. Quality
standards are noticeably declining at both the primary and secondary levels. This is
a consequence of the rapid increase in the school-age population, and also of the
fact that the expansion in enrolment has not been matched by an expansion in the
supply of qualified teachers and quality educational materials, nor by investments in
school safety, basic sanitation and hygiene. Many Tanzanian schools ar e neither
healthy nor safe environments, particularly for adolescent girls.
12. The number of girls and boys in primary school is nearly equal. In secondary
schools, the number of girls as a percentage of total enrolment increased from

5

43.2 per cent to 46.8 per cent from 1992 and 2007. Gender equity markedly declines
from the outset of secondary school; girls make up only 35 per cent of the total
number of students who complete secondary school. Compared to boys of the same
age, girls’ performance in mathematics and science, as well as on school-level
examinations, is particularly poor. In higher education, girls ’ enrolment as a
percentage of total enrolment reached 34 per cent in 2007.
13. By the age of 14 (lower secondary school), approximately half of Tan zania’s
children have left the schooling system. One third of children attend secondary
school, and less than 1 per cent enrol in institutions of higher education. Alternative
opportunities for formal learning, basic literacy and vocational education do no t
meet the demand.
14. Tanzania’s impressive achievements in child health continue. Under-5
mortality rates (Millennium Development Goal 4) continue to drop — from 147 deaths
per 1,000 live births in 1999, to 81 in 2010. Likewise infant mortality declined from
99 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1999, to 51 in 2010. Neonatal mortality accounts
for 30 per cent of the deaths of children under 5 years old. Improved child mortality
is due in part to the recent improvements in malaria control. Other contributing
factors have been: vaccination against measles, Vitamin A supplementation and
other preventative programmes, including those aimed at preventing mother -to-child
transmission of HIV. By contrast, neonatal deaths (26 per 1,000 live births in 2010)
have been associated with poor maternal health during pregnancy and inadequate
obstetric and neonatal care at delivery.
15. Tanzania lags in the area of maternal health. The maternal mortality ratio in
2010 is estimated at 454 deaths per 100,000 live births, lower than the previous
figure of 578 in 2004, but below the Health Sector Strategic Plan III target of 265 by
2015. About half of all deliveries are assisted by skilled attendants or take place in a
health facility. The ―three delays‖ — in the decision to seek care, in reaching
appropriate care, and before intervention at a facility — contribute significantly to
the high maternal mortality and morbidity. The weakness in institutional
preparedness to respond — as a result of inadequate equipment and supplies, and of
insufficient and unskilled staff — affects the quality of obstetric and newborn care.
There is a need both for skilled health providers across the system and for filling the
vacant posts. (65 per cent are vacant.) There is also a need for continued
commitment to the current national health sector and primary health -care
development efforts including: increasing the number of health centres offering
packages of essential care; overcoming shortages of equipment and reproductive
health supplies; addressing human resources challenges; effective health-care
financing; and improving information and referral systems and linkages with
community mobilization efforts.
16. Gender inequities underlie the persistently high levels of maternal deaths in
Tanzania and the lack of progress in maternal health. High maternal mortality is
linked with high fertility rates and the low socio-economic status of women. The
total fertility rate in Tanzania over two decades has changed only slightly, from
5.8 in 1996 to 5.4 in 2010. Rural women have more than two more children on
average than their urban counterparts (rural 6.1, urban 3.7). The proportion of
married women using contraception has risen steadily — from 13 per cent in 1996
to 27.4 per cent in 2010. With only 12 per cent of women 15 to 24 years using
modern contraception, teenage pregnancy rates are high. More than half of women

6

under the age of 19 are either pregnant or already mothers, and one in three
teenagers in the poorest households has given birth at least once. Teenage
pregnancies — often a consequence of early marriage — carry a higher risk of
maternal death.
17. Poor nutrition is common among women of reproductive age. One in two is
chronically anaemic; one in ten has a low body mass index, which indicates chron ic
energy deficiency and leads to increased risks during pregnancy. Child malnutrition
rates are also high. Among children under age 5, 35.4 per cent were stunted and 20.7
per cent were underweight in 2010. Anaemia affects more than two thirds of all
children, while 8 per cent suffer from severe anaemia. Lack of breastfeeding of
infants can contribute to nutritional problems. Forty-one per cent of newborns are
not breastfed in the first hour of life, and fewer than 15 per cent up to the age of six
months. Complementary foods given to infants are often inappropriate and
adulterated with unclean water. An overhaul of nutrition and other health policies,
strategies and plans in support of maternal and child health is required in order to
achieve several of the Millennium Development Goals.
18. Tanzania’s progress on Millennium Development Goal 6 — combating HIV
and AIDS, malaria and other diseases — has been remarkable, but has emphasized
vertical interventions in HIV and malaria. Malaria transmission, which pla ys a large
part in child mortality, has been reduced significantly. Malaria prevalence in
Zanzibar dropped from 46.2 per cent of the population in 2002 to 0.8 per cent in
2006. This was a result of improved malaria control as well as of wide and free
distribution and use of insecticide-treated nets. Nevertheless, malaria continues to
be a severe challenge on the mainland where the prevalence was 18.1 per cent in
2007-2008.
19. HIV prevalence declined from 7 per cent in 2004 to 5.7 per cent in 2008 in
Mainland Tanzania, and stabilized around 0.6 per cent in Zanzibar. Disparities in
prevalence exist among different socio-economic groups. Among young people aged
15 to 24 (20 per cent of the total population) HIV prevalence declined, but infection
among girls of the same age is disproportionately high (4 per cent compared to 1 per
cent for young men). Only 39 per cent of young women and 42 per cent of young
men have comprehensive knowledge about HIV. Low and inconsistent condom use,
low perception of the risks, and high-risk behaviour, including multiple concurrent
sexual partners and age-disparate sexual relationships, are factors fuelling
transmission. Though Zanzibar has low levels of HIV prevalence, it is high there
among the most at-risk populations — intravenous drug users (15 per cent), sex
workers (10 per cent) and men who have sex with men (12 per cent). (Comparable
data on prevalence rates among at risk populations on the mainland is unavailable.)
Members of these populations are subject to stigmatizatio n and discrimination, and
have limited access to services and information.
20. HIV prevention, care and treatment services have been significantly scaled -up
nationwide. More than 70 per cent of centres providing antenatal care now offer
services in the field of prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission.
Nevertheless, significant service gaps remain. Only 68 per cent of HIV-positive
pregnant women and 50 per cent of HIV-exposed infants receive anti-retroviral
prophylaxis to prevent mother-to-child transmission. Integration of HIV and sexualand-reproductive health services is limited. People living with HIV and AIDS still

7

lack many services and participate only indirectly in prevention and policy advocacy efforts.
21. Efforts to mitigate the social and economic impact of HIV and AIDS have
expanded, yet much remains to be done. Cumulatively, the epidemic has orphaned
more than 1.3 million Tanzanian children since 1985. Many receive assistance under
the interventions of the National Costed Plan of Action for Most Vulnerable
Children. Of the total HIV-positive population in Tanzania, 840,000 (56 per cent)
are women between 15 and 49 years old.
22. Access to safe drinking water for the rural population is low (58.7 per cent in
2009). In formal urban settlements the figure is 84 per cent. Only 33 per cent of
households have access to improved latrines. The dire condition of water, sanitation
and hygiene facilities in schools and health centres is cause for concern. Water
supply sustainability is a national challenge strongly correlated with poverty and
locality. That is, it is a particular challenge for rural and informal urban localities.
Until national solutions emerge, it is critical to provide more support to caregivers at
the household level to respond to water, sanitation and health challenges.
23. Formal social-security programmes and health insurance cover a negligible,
mostly urban-based and relatively well-off portion of the population, providing even
these people only modest benefits. Most people have no protection against
contingencies, livelihood shocks or severe deprivation. A draft National Social
Protection Framework targeting vulnerable groups exists, but associated operational
modalities as well as institutional arrangements, services and resour ces are still
lacking. A more comprehensive framework for establishing safety nets and new
models for social transfers is required. The impact of existing social assistance
programmes — social security, ageing and disability — in reducing poverty and
hunger similarly need attention.
24. The enactment of the Law of the Child Act in November 2009 marked an
opportunity to create a protective environment for children. Children ’s care and
development takes place in an environment of acute domestic insecurity. Th ere are
more than 2 millions orphaned or abandoned children, and 20 per cent of the 5 to
17 year olds are engaged in child labour. Only 8 per cent of children under 5 have a
birth certificate. Massive external investment in the National Costed Plan of Acti on
programme improved access to food, education and health services, though services
are not yet comprehensive or available to all vulnerable children. Significant gaps in
protection remain. The structures, systems and services for extending effective
protection to children subject to abuse, exploitation and violence, and for children
with disabilities, are lacking. There is an urgent need to increase and train
personnel, develop monitoring and referral systems, strengthen district and national
data collection, and promote shared awareness of child protection needs at both the
community level and among those involved in the enactment and enforcement of
legislation.
25. The Government recognizes in the new MKUKUTA and MKUZA that good
governance is fundamental to achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and to improvements in the quality of life and social well -being of citizens.
26. Tanzania is a stable, peaceful, parliamentary democracy. During the last two
decades, political pluralism has been introduced and multi-party elections have been
held every five years since 1995. Nevertheless, political parties have paltry and

8

indistinguishable political platforms due to such problems as inadequate capacities
and lack of gender equality (that is, a lack of advancement of women to leadership
positions).
27. Although the Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania and the Zanzibar
House of Representatives are increasingly active in overseeing the work of the
executive branches, there are still many weaknesses in ensuring government
transparency and accountability. These include weaknesses in the oversight of the
implementation of poverty reduction strategies. Recently developed plans for the
national legislatures indicated significant capacity needs in the are as of oversight,
the making of laws and the representation of citizens.
28. The broad-based national governance assessment and consultative process of
the African Peer Review Mechanism is under way. Political reconciliation in
Zanzibar is still tentative and will require continued support. In Mainland Tanzania,
conflicts over natural resource use and rights need addressing through strengthening
local dialogue and dispute-resolution mechanisms.
29. The Tanzanian Government faces significant capacity challe nges in managing
development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Monitoring and
reporting on the implementation of poverty reduction strategies continue to require
improvement, and the coordination of implementation and of evidence -based
planning and budgeting needs strengthening. Aid management, including as regards
dialogue with stakeholders, still poses a significant challenge. Several reform
programmes are under way, but have been slow to achieve results. Additional reform
coordination is required while comprehensive efforts to address corruption need
further support.
30. The concept of rule of law, including human rights and legal traditions, is not
widely understood or applied. Implementation in the justice sector is flawed by
corruption, disadvantages for women and children (including gender violence and
some cultural norms), and inadequate protection of the rights of the poor. While
Tanzania is a signatory to the international human rights regime, implementation is
constrained by the lack of a national action plan for incorporating human rights in
national law, the justice system and public education.
31. The right to life, safety and support in life-threatening emergencies is a
challenge. Tanzania is vulnerable to recurring natural disast ers, climate change,
declining environmental sustainability and food insecurity. These challenges require
well-organized, multisector early warning systems and preparation for emergencies.
32. Tanzania is prone to the influx of refugees, often for long per iods of time. The
United Nations is currently assisting some 100,000 refugees in north -west Tanzania
as well as the vulnerable host communities.

II. Past cooperation and lessons learned
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
33. The current 2007-2010 UNDAF and the four organization country programmes
have been extended until mid-2011 to enable full alignment of the Development
Assistance Plan with the national budget cycle. The Development Assistance

9

Framework supports the implementation of MKUKUTA and MKUZA, in line with
the guiding principles of the Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania of the Tanzanian
Government and development partners.
34. UNDAF outcomes follow the outcomes and indicators of the national poverty
reduction strategies. Since the outcomes are wide-ranging, the United Nations has
not always been able to assess its distinct contributions to national development.
The lesson learned is that the Development Assistance Plan outcomes should be
defined with sufficient specificity to allow the distinct United Nations contribution
to be measured.

Delivering as One initiatives
35. The decision of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania in 2007 to
be one of the eight Delivering as One pilots transformed United Nations activities in
Tanzania. The United Nations pilot programme began after the Tanzanian
Government approved the Development Assistance Framework and the four
organization’s country programme documents. Nonetheless, the country
management team was able to adjust its operations. The ―one leader‖, ―one fund‖
and ―one voice‖ aspects of the Delivering as One approach have been particularly
successful. Eleven joint United Nations programmes were established within the
Assistance Framework. Financial support from other development partners to the
―one fund‖ is indicative of their confidence in the ongoing reform process.
36. The joint programmes offer lessons for improving programming and results.
The ―one programme‖ approach was established two years into UNDAF’s
organization-specific country programme document cycle. Implemented through the
joint programmes, it responded to national priorities in sectors in which the United
Nations had expertise. The approach involved collaboration among United Nations
organizations and partners in drafting joint work plans, budgets and programme
results, in parallel with (and in some cases superseding) organization activities
identified in the Development Assistance Framework and organization country
programme documents. The joint planning and reporting processes increased
coherence and coordination. According to the findings of the 2010 country -led
evaluation of the Delivering as One approach, factors contributing to better
programmes included: joint programming; clear division of l abour based on the
comparative advantage and mandate of each organization; increased mutual
accountability; an empowered country management team; and performance -based
funding through the ―one fund‖ approach.
37. In a process that strived for inclusiveness and participation, ensuring strategic
focus has proved to be challenging. The main challenge of the joint programmes is
the existence of multiple initiatives and projects put together without adequate
mechanisms for prioritizing and results-based planning. Another concern is weak
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and lack of joint annual reviews, by which
constraints could be detected earlier and corrective measures taken. United Nations
organizations and implementing partners have varying capacities t o participate in
joint programmes. Finally, the systems and operational support for Delivering as
One interventions were put in place gradually, and were therefore not implemented
in full or used to their full potential. This includes basket funding, full

10

implementation of the principles regarding a harmonized approach to cash transfers
(HACT principles), and joint procurement.

The four organizations
World Food Programme
38. The WFP country programme aimed at reducing vulnerability to food
insecurity in the drought-prone central and northern regions, and at building
national capacities. These objectives were pursued through four integrated WFP
initiatives: the food for education (FFE) and food for assets (FFA) programmes;
targeted supplementary feeding; and HIV/AIDS programmes. Through the food for
education programme, in 2010 WFP reached approximately 640,000 children in
1,167 schools with school meals, increasing attendance and exam pass rates. WFP
supported the Tanzanian Government in developing a draft national school-feeding
policy and provided technical support to strengthen the national Comprehensive
Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA) and food security monitoring
system. The WFP food for assets programme supported communities affe cted by
chronic hunger in drought-prone areas in order to improve resilience to shocks and
protect assets. The targeted supplementary feeding programme promoted pre - and
post-natal health and addressed the problem of low-birth-weight children. It
increased immunization and growth-monitoring coverage by providing, as part of
regular mother-and-child services, a monthly take-home ration to pregnant and
lactating women as well as to moderately malnourished children in two districts.
The WFP AIDS programme supported food-insecure people affected by HIV and
AIDS. WFP procured food locally, supporting smallholder farmers, and engaged
local transport services. The 2010 country programme evaluation concluded that
interventions: contributed to improved food security at individual and household
levels; were effective in creating productive safety nets; and are likely to have
long-term impact. For instance, some of the target areas of the food for assets
programme no longer need emergency assistance during droughts. The exception is
the HIV and AIDS programme which lacks direct linkages to other programmes.
Based on the lessons learned hereby, WFP plans to enhance opportunities for
partnership and linkages with existing Tanzanian Government policies and priority
programmes, including in the field of disaster risk reduction. WFP also plans to
work closely with the Tanzanian Government on policies and strategies integrating
the safety net programmes into budgets and plans. The idea is eventually to hand
these programmes over to the Government.
United Nations Development Programme
39. The UNDP country programme aimed to: enhance pro-poor development,
wealth creation, democratic governance and development management, and to
mainstream national development policies related to the environment, HIV and
AIDS, and gender. The focus was on national capacity development and
policymaking. The UNDP contribution strengthened dialogue, capacity and
ownership of the poverty reduction strategy monitoring and evaluation systems
involved in the production of the national Poverty and Human Development Report
and the Millennium Development Goals Report. UNDP also helped improve the
national capacity to promote inclusive economic growth, to monitor poverty, and to
achieve evidence-based development planning and decision-making at the national

11

and local levels. UNDP supported Tanzania in piloting the Millennium Development
Goals Acceleration Framework. Strengthened systems and tools for the management
of external resources, such as the Aid Management Platform, and capacities to adopt
an integrated trade strategy were established. In the field of democratic governance,
support given by UNDP to the introduction of a permanent electronic registry of
voters improved the effectiveness of electoral management bodies and added
credibility to the political process. UNDP also supported the design and
implementation of strategies to help national institutions combat corruption and to
promote a holistic and participatory approach to corruption prevention. Further, it
assisted in the integration of environmental issues into national poverty reduction
efforts, including in local income-generation activities. Capacities for environment
conservation and management of land, forest, water and wildlife resources a nd
biodiversity reserves were developed. UNDP developed coordination capacities for
a national response to climate change both as regards adaptation and as regards
integrating alternative energy solutions in national policy. The organization
strengthened capacities for disaster risk reduction and improved human security.
UNDP assisted in HIV and AIDS mainstreaming and capacity-building for the
national multisector response to this challenge. UNDP made a management
contribution to the Delivering as One pilot, administering the ―one fund‖ and acting
as a managing agent of five United Nations joint programmes.
United Nations Population Fund
40. The UNFPA country programme focused on policy dialogue, advocacy, and
capacity- and partnership-building in areas of population and development,
reproductive health and rights, and gender equality. Through technical support,
UNFPA strengthened production and utilization of disaggregated population data,
including providing ongoing support for the preparation of the 20 12 census. UNFPA
led efforts to ensure integration of population and environmental issues in the
poverty reduction strategies, sector policies and programmes. Increasing the
availability of disaggregated data drew policymakers’ attention to gender disparities.
UNFPA engaged in four of the joint programmes, playing a management role for the
joint programme to reduce maternal and newborn mortality. UNFPA continued to
participate in the health sector-wide approach, including in the Health Basket
funding mechanism, to ensure accountability and predictability of funds for
reproductive and child health. Responding to gaps in skills, UNFPA supported
pre-service and in-service training of health providers. UNFPA advocated for
dedicated budget lines for contraceptives and increased budget allocations, and it
procured selected contraceptives for Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar so that a
consistent supply would be ensured. The management, leadership and technical
capacities of the two national AIDS commissions were built, and support was given
to the development of the National Costed Plan of Action. Strategic partnerships
with faith-based organizations continued to address reproductive health and rights,
gender equality and HIV prevention. UNFPA improved access to youth -friendly
health services and enhanced youth leadership and participation in the review and
development of selected national and sector- specific frameworks, plans and
strategies. The UNFPA gender leadership provided support for mainstreaming
gender in sectoral plans and strategies; gender monitoring and evaluation across
ministries, departments and agencies; and addressing gender-based violence, as well
as for promoting greater utilization of gender policy guidelines and mainstreaming
instruments.

12

United Nations Children’s Fund
41. UNICEF contributed to results at national and subnational levels as well as
upstream policy formulation and capacity-building and downstream support to
quality service provision by national partners. In the area of child protec tion,
sustained advocacy and technical support resulted in drafting and enactment of the
comprehensive Law of the Child Act. In the health field, UNICEF supported the
development and implementation of the National Road Map Strategic Plan to
Accelerate Reduction of Maternal, Newborn and Child Deaths, the National
Nutrition Strategy, and the scale-up plan for the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV during pregnancy and childbirth. UNICEF supported the
National Multi-Sector HIV Prevention Strategy, National Costed Plan of Action,
National Life Skills Education Framework, and the national strategy for care and
support in education services for HIV prevention. In the field of education, UNICEF
supported the establishment of primary school basic standards and the national
primary school in-service teacher training strategy. In the area of water, sanitation
and hygiene, efforts culminated in bringing together four key ministries to define
roles in support of one lead governmental entity in the sector: the Environmental
Health and Sanitation Unit in the health ministry. Furthermore, UNICEF convened
and mobilized civil society organizations around child rights. At the subnational
level, UNICEF supported the scaling up of national programmes in seven distr icts
by strengthening capacities to ensure: that district planning and budgeting prioritizes
children; delivery of facility-based services; and enhanced community awareness.
UNICEF successfully scaled up national programmes, although confinement to
learning districts limited its ability to respond to vulnerabilities elsewhere,
particularly in HIV and AIDS prevention and nutrition. This has been highlighted in
reviews.

Common lessons learned
42. By focusing on upstream policy work, United Nations organizations were able
to have a transformational impact on a national level in many areas, as well as the
sustained technical-level engagement necessary for the adoption and finalization of
new policies and legislation. Greater reliance on the internal divisi on of labour and
more effective delegation between organizations contributed to coherence,
efficiency and policy results. Between now and 2015, the United Nations needs to
further expand these efforts to intensify harmonization among all development
partners, contributing to stronger partnerships between multilateral and bilateral
development organizations.
43. The United Nations contribution to the national policy dialogue is increasingly
a measure of its relevance in Tanzania. Going forward, the expectati ons of the
United Nations system as a whole to support national reform processes will require
the United Nations organizations involved to make commensurate investments in
capacities to deliver results and leadership, both programmatically and at the polic y
level. Efforts to strengthen joint and mutual accountability and transparent reporting
on results need to be scaled-up in support of resource mobilization for the United
Nations system.
44. Programmes need to be aligned with national policies to ensure maximum
impact and address sustainability. New modalities such as sector basket funding can

13

be useful to leverage United Nations technical support and limited resources. One of
the comparative advantages of the United Nations in this area is its ability to support
building national capacity by managing and leading a process that involves many
development partners.
45. Inadequate national capacities to implement endorsed policies and strategies,
as well as to address overlaps and conflicting policies, are key implementation
constraints that require attention, including support for coordination and
harmonization. Capacity development should build on participatory assessments and
focus more on the strengthening of systems and institutions, along with human
resource development. To increase the impact of national programmes, it will be
useful to strengthen performance at a decentralized level by demonstrating effective
approaches and enhancing the capacities of central institutions.
United Nations Development Assistance Plan
46. The United Nations Development Assistance Plan responds to these lessons. It
is the complete programme of cooperation across all United Nations organizations
working with the Tanzanian Government, including specialized and non -resident
organizations. It is a tool for jointly formulating realistic work plans and budgets for
all United Nations organizations, plans and budgets that are aligned with their
capacities and the division of labour of the Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania.
Interventions are prioritized, focused and contain an interlinked strategy that aims at
a coherent overall programme, aligned, where possible, to sector policies, national
strategies and structures. Linkages to regional and global initiatives are stated in t he
Plan at the sectoral level. In this way greater synergy is forged between United
Nations plans and multilateral and bilateral support. Quality plans and monitoring
and evaluation matrices in the Plan will lead to annual reviews, reporting against
targets and allowing for enhanced performance-based funding. This will have a
synergistic effect, increasing the value of organization inputs.

III. Proposed programme
47. The common country programme document is anchored in the 2011 -2015
Development Assistance Plan. The principal and strategic contributions of the four
organizations are designed in response to the situation analysis and the lessons
learned from past cooperation. They align with the national priorities, are consistent
with global and regional initiatives, and target improved partner capacities for:
pro-poor growth; enhanced sector capacities for delivery of comprehensive basic
social services; and stronger governance and accountability, encompassing human
rights, gender responsiveness, humanitarian assistance and disaster risk reduction.

Pro-poor growth
Economic growth and reduction of poverty
48. The common country programme document provides strategic inputs to
pro-poor, inclusive economic development. The comparative advantage of t he
United Nations lies in its ability to enable national stakeholders. It will provide

14

technical assistance to the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to create
an inclusive growth model.
49. UNFPA will provide technical and financial assistance to the Tanzanian
Government and to higher-learning and research institutions to generate and utilize
disaggregated demographic and housing data for a more comprehensive approach
to: economic development; integration of population and environmental issues i nto
planning and budgeting frameworks; and strengthened expertise in analysis and data
gathering related to population, environment and poverty linkages. The organization
will support the National Bureau of Statistics’ 2012 census; establish an Integrated
Management Information System (IMIS), and coordinate and implement the
Tanzania Statistical Master Plan, which involves the establishment of routine
administrative and vital records systems.
50. WFP will support the capacity of national institutions to co nduct periodic rapid
vulnerability analyses and the Comprehensive Food Security Vulnerability
Assessment. WFP will also support the implementation of the Tanzanian
Government’s compact investment plan for the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme. This targets improved agricultural production and
community asset creation within the framework of strengthened food and nutrition
security.
51. UNDP will support capacity development of ministries, departments and
agencies so they can formulate and implement policies and strategies that improve
income and promote employment. South-South exchanges will enable prompt
adoption of techniques and initiatives that are proving beneficial. Support for
contract management and the development of public-private partnerships across
Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar will be explored.
52. The United Nations will build capacities in relevant ministries and the private
sector to broaden market opportunities, including within the East African
Community Common Market. UNDP will provide technical assistance to the
Tanzanian Government’s coordination of a broad trade-sector programme and
support streamlining of regional integration regulations. Through the global
knowledge network of UNDP it will provide trade policy opt ions that advance
human development, and, via the Enhanced Integration Framework, promote further
integration within the East African Community.
53. Interventions by WFP will focus on strengthening value along the agricultural
supply chain. One important way the United Nations can achieve tangible results in
Tanzania is by providing assistance in the area of disaster risk reduction, in
particular to bolster national capacity where it is lacking. Using this approach,
productive safety nets — including the food for assets and food for education
programmes — will strengthen community resilience, reduce vulnerability and
enhance local food access and availability. These efforts will include capacity
support for the local transport sector and more sustainable mar ket access for small
producers across the entire agricultural cycle, thus promoting household economic
growth and reducing hunger.

15

Environment and climate change
54. The United Nations will support the Tanzanian Government to ensure that key
sector ministries, departments and agencies and local government authorities
integrate environmental concerns and climate-change adaptation and mitigation in
their strategies and plans. Enhanced Tanzanian Government capacity will ensure
coordination and monitoring of natural resource use at national and local levels in
key target sectors, including agriculture, water, health, forestry, wildlife and
tourism, energy, and coastal zone resources.
55. UNDP will support the Government and other partners to articulate a v igorous
national response to climate change and rapid environmental degradation. Building
on its global network of expertise and its corporate thrust to address climate change
adaptation and mitigation, UNDP will help build capacities to coordinate and
mainstream efforts at the sector level and to reinforce implementation at the local
level. UNDP will also use its comparative strength as a trust fund manager to
facilitate establishment of an investment fund for climate change. UNDP will assist
in developing mitigation strategies through training and technical support to
national institutions, including those in the private sector, as well as by the
promotion of: renewable energy sources, improved energy standards, efficient
technologies and ―clean practices‖ (to help preserve the environment). UNDP will
continue supporting development of a national framework for reducing emissions
from deforestation and forest degradation, as well as of local capacity to manage
forest carbon projects.
56. WFP will support inclusion in local plans of best practices that promote
community adaptation to climate variability, strengthen resilience to shocks, and
improve access to food. These practices include small-scale water catchments, soil
conservation and feeder roads.
57. UNDP will support capacity development for improved enforcement of laws
on the environment and of regulations protecting ecosystems, as well as for
sustainable management of natural resources. UNDP will support awareness -raising
related to the Environmental Management Act, facilitating formulation of
environmental plans and strategies at the local government level, as well as
strengthening technical, financial and governance capacities for sustainable land and
forest management.
58. With strategic support from the Global Environment Facility, UNDP will
continue to strengthen national capacity for sustainable management of protected
areas as well as of coastal forest and marine ecosystems. This will include
strengthening policy and regulatory frameworks. Assista nce will be provided to help
develop: national frameworks for mainstreaming sustainable land management into
national economic growth goals, as well as financing of and payment for ecosystem
services related to carbon, water and biodiversity. In Zanzibar, support will be given
to institutions for the management of forests and protected areas.

16

Quality of life and social well-being
Education
59. Addressing equitable access to quality education at all levels, including
alternative learning opportunities for illiterate adults, the Development Assistance
Plan will provide assistance to a range of initiatives aimed at improving learning
quality and teaching within and outside the formal education system.
60. UNICEF will support implementation of the national policy on integrated early
childhood development. It will also support improvements in the quality of teacher
education programmes for basic education in priority subjects, and enhanced
resource allocations to priority districts for evidence -based planning, management
and quality assurance.
61. WFP will assist the Tanzanian Government in finalizing a national school feeding policy and implement a school-feeding scheme to promote lower drop out
rates and improved learning. The scheme will provide markets for smallholder
farmers and a safety net for children in poor households.
62. UNICEF will support finalization and implementation of ―second chance‖
policies and guidelines for learners whose school attendance has been disrupted,
particularly by pregnancy. Children with disabilities and other vulnerabilities, such
as those living with albinism, will be a particular focus. As regards alternative
learning opportunities for out-of-school children, UNICEF has been supporting the
mainstreaming of an integrated post-primary education system in selected districts.
UNFPA will strengthen the provision of youth life-skills education in the areas of
sexual and reproductive health and HIV prevention.
Health and nutrition
63. The Development Assistance Plan provides for extensive United Nations
engagement and for capacity-building of the health system.
64. The United Nations will support the national Strategic Plan to Accelerate
Reduction of Maternal, Newborn and Child Deaths. UNFPA and UNICEF will
jointly accelerate implementation of this Plan, particularly in low-performing
regions in Mainland Tanzania. UNFPA will equip Zanzibar health facilities to
provide quality family planning, basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric care,
post-natal services, and integration of sexual and reproductive health and HIV and
AIDS services.
65. The United Nations contributes to capacity development for integration of
nutrition into national and subnational policies, plans and budgets, as well as
contributing to the strengthening of institutional arrangements for providing
services. UNICEF will support nutrition services in high -risk regions through
development of guidelines and the introduction of nutrition workers at subnational
levels. WFP supports the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and of local
government authorities to plan and budget in a nutrition-sensitive fashion,
emphasizing food fortification and dietary diversity. WFP further assists ministries,
departments and agencies in providing targeted and time -bound supplementary
feeding (combined with appropriate nutrition messaging) in areas with high levels
of malnutrition and acute hunger.

17

66. The availability and supply of essential medicines and health commodities
across the country will be addressed through technical support, including through an
information system for supply chain management. UNICEF support will strengthen
vaccine and related cold-chain capacity. UNFPA will further strengthen the sexual
and reproductive health supply chain, focusing on supplies of co ntraceptives and
other reproductive health items.
67. Priority will be given to community health structures that promote the use of
local care. UNICEF will support a review of these structures, develop guidelines
and implement distance-learning schemes for community-owned resource persons.
The organization will build Ministry of Health communications capacities related to
evidence-based programmes. UNFPA will provide client-oriented information and
other demand-stimulating interventions to promote improved health-care seeking
behaviour, including by young people.
68. The United Nations will provide technical support for the development of a
national health sector training plan to guide human resources planning nationally
and address human resources issues at all levels. UNFPA will propose alternative
approaches to health worker skills development and support the implementation of
an integrated pre-service nursing curriculum in Zanzibar. The technical assistance
provided by UNICEF will include curriculum development, job aids and supervision
tools for training and accrediting community health workers in zonal centres.
69. The United Nations will provide technical assistance to strengthen routine
health data collection and analysis, enabling national and subnational health
authorities to direct health services to low-coverage areas. UNICEF will facilitate
the scaling up of innovative approaches to data and information capture, including
approaches involving mobile phone technologies. It will also facilitate the
integration of child survival and nutrition indicators into national and subnational
surveys.
HIV and AIDS
70. The United Nations prioritizes capacity-building and technical assistance to
promote universal access to prevention, care and support based o n the UNAIDS
Outcome Framework priority areas. To ensure the greatest access to quality services,
including a community-based continuum of care, UNICEF focuses on serviceprovider capacity in the public sector, among civil society organizations and in
networks of people living with HIV and AIDS. UNFPA will support expansion and
integration of family planning services for women living with HIV. WFP will
advocate and give policy and technical advice to local government authorities. The
aims are to encourage budgeting for a food and nutrition component as part of
treatment and management strategies for HIV and AIDS (transitioning from direct
food assistance), and to encourage specialized partners, along with government, to
take over existing programmes.
71. The United Nations will support implementation of a comprehensive
multisector HIV prevention strategy, emphasizing high-risk settings (high-prevalence
regions, schools, learning institutions) and high-risk groups (out-of-school
adolescents, girls, youths, most-at-risk populations). UNFPA will support the
implementation of the HIV prevention strategy, focusing on comprehensive condom
programming, life-planning skills for out-of-school youth, equipping media and
civil society organizations for social and behavio ur change communication, and

18

addressing prevention among discordant couples (in which one partner is infected
and the other is not). UNICEF will support the scaling up of interventions that
reduce vulnerability and prevent HIV infection and sexual violence among
adolescent girls and young people in high-prevalence regions.
72. UNDP will continue supporting capacity development at the Tanzania
Commission for AIDS (TACAIDS) and the Zanzibar AIDS Commission (ZAC). The
aims are: to promote leadership and coordination of the national response; to
promote sensitivity to human rights issues and advocacy for people living with HIV
and AIDS; and to address misconceptions, stigmas and discrimination. UNFPA will
support the implementation of the Gender Operational Pla n for HIV and AIDS.
UNICEF will assist in the production of advocacy and communication packages for
the national AIDS response, with a focus on children and young persons.
73. The United Nations will assist disaggregated data analysis to promote
enhanced understanding of the drivers of the epidemic as well as of the human
rights issues involved in working with the most-at-risk populations. UNFPA will
facilitate research on sexual risk behaviours and on updating communication
strategies to better target women and youth, including people living with HIV and
AIDS. UNICEF will commission an analysis of national survey data to inform the
planning and implementation of the national HIV and AIDS response and to support
the monitoring of the National Costed Plan of Action for effectiveness and
responsiveness.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
74. UNDAP has an upstream focus, providing technical assistance and capacity
development for improved national mechanisms: for enhanced water, sanitation and
hygiene; for sanitation and hygiene coordination initiatives; for national water
resources management; and, in Zanzibar, for water supply and to leverage sector
funds.
75. UNICEF will help ministries, departments and agencies coordinate and
harmonize coverage of child, girl-friendly and accessible water, sanitation and
hygiene within schools. The strategy includes increased fund allocations for
ministries, departments and agencies to develop and roll out national school water,
sanitation and hygiene guidelines and comprehensive campaigns to promote social
and behavioural change.
76. UNICEF will contribute to a coordinated national response to issues affecting
household sanitation, hygiene and water treatment as well as safe water storage. A
national advocacy campaign on sanitation and hygiene, with a special focus on
Zanzibar, will be supported, as will promotion of hygiene and sanitation,
communication about these matters, and the development of the evidence base for
appropriate water, sanitation and hygiene strategies. UNICEF will support the
capacity of organizations representing vulnerable groups to influence national water,
sanitation and hygiene policy dialogue on equity and sustainability of water
supplies.
Social protection
77. In support of national goals for adequate social protection and to promote the
rights of the vulnerable, the Development Assistance Plan focuses on promoting the

19

adoption, scaling-up and better integration of public and other mechanisms in
Tanzania to address socio-economic vulnerabilities and deliver protection services
for Tanzanian children and families. UNICEF will technically support the
development of a coherent social protection policy and regulatory framework, and
the establishment of institutional mechanisms for coordination of social -protection
interventions. WFP will promote interventions related to providing food security,
nutrition-related safety nets and broader social protection.
78. In addressing the need for more protective services for children and vulnerable
families, UNICEF will support the Tanzanian Government in the development of a
tested strategy for child protection. It will make use of the experience of piloting
child protection models and strengthened child protection responses within the
National Costed Plan of Action.
79. UNFPA will allocate resources to develop better understanding among
decision makers and communities of violence and the abuse of women. UNICEF
and UNFPA target gaps in legislation, strategies and policies needed to protect
children, young people and women from abuse, violence and exploitation. Such
efforts include promoting an effective national response on the issue of birth
registration. UNICEF will also support the development of technical skills and
competencies of relevant duty bearers to prevent and respond to incidents of such
abuse.

Governance, accountability and human rights; emergency
and refugees
Governance, accountability and human rights
80. The United Nations will assist comprehensive strengthening of national
capacities to manage development at national and subnational levels.
81. UNDP will help strengthen key national institutions for policy coordination
and planning, including financing, budgeting and MKUKUTA monitoring. UNICEF
will provide support for enhanced institutional capacity at the subnational level for
planning, budgeting, monitoring and reporting. UNICEF will support further policy
development and enhancing the availability of data regarding children in national
monitoring systems.
82. The Tanzanian Government’s capacity to manage and coordinate international
development assistance will be strengthened through the development of strategies,
action plans and an improved aid management system to facilitate national
leadership. UNDP will assist ministries, departments and agencies to better
coordinate core public sector reforms with the goal of more coherent and rapid
improvements in good governance, and UNDP will help the Government of
Zanzibar identify and support select core reforms.
83. Assistance will be provided so that ministries, departments and agencies, as
well as non-State actors, can advance key national strategies to combat corruption.
84. UNDP will continue supporting the improvement of election management
capacities via the application of integrated systems throughout the electoral cycle.
This will be done with a view to extending assistance to the 2015 election process if
requested.

20

85. Interventions to strengthen parliaments will respond to the corporate plans of
each legislature, enabling the members to better fulfil their responsibilities to
provide representation, develop legislation and provide oversight, including
oversight of poverty reduction strategies. Support for political parties will
encourage the development of platforms and promote internal de mocracy and the
leadership of women.
86. UNDP will support completion of the African Peer Review Mechanism and
provide strategic support to governance needs in the emerging East African
Community. In the context of the UNDP conflict prevention and recovery mandate,
reconciliation and dialogue at the local level in Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar
will be supported.
87. UNDP, in collaboration with United Nations partners, will support human
rights promotion and protection capacities through development of a co mprehensive
national human rights action plan and human rights education strategy. UNICEF
will help relevant ministries, departments and agencies, as well as civil society,
coordinate, collect and compile information to enable the fulfilment of the
Tanzanian Government’s reporting obligations under such instruments as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. In conjunction with UNFPA, UNICEF will
also help with reporting obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.
88. The United Nations supports the Tanzanian Government reforms of the justice
system on behalf of women and children. UNICEF will provide technical assistance
to develop policies and strategies for strengthening child and juvenile justice i n line
with the Law of the Child Act and international standards. The Organization will
also support the strengthening of human resources in the judicial system and among
law enforcement agencies. The aim here will be the implementation of procedures
that are sensitive to the needs of women and children and respectful of their rights.
UNFPA will focus specifically on the review and reform of laws in Zanzibar that
concern gender-based violence.

Emergency preparedness and response
89. The United Nations will contribute to enhancing the emergency preparation
and response capacities of the Tanzanian Government and of Tanzanian
communities. Emphasis will be on the delivery of coordinated emergency
preparedness and responses in the areas of: water, sanitatio n and hygiene; health;
education; protection; agriculture; food security and nutrition. UNICEF will
facilitate linkages between ministries, departments and agencies and other
stakeholders to promote the assessment of emergencies, information -sharing,
monitoring and overall response. It will help high-risk districts and shehias (village
councils) create emergency preparedness and response plans, including allocated
resources and integrated communication strategies. WFP will focus on strengthening
the early warning systems of agricultural line ministries and communities. It will
support the food-security components of emergency nutrition assessments, along
with the development of an inter-ministerial contingency plan for Zanzibar. UNFPA
will support procurement of equipment and supplies to address sexual and
reproductive health and gender-based violence in line with the minimum initial
service package for reproductive health in emergencies. It will also support

21

incorporation of background demographic data for e mergency preparedness into the
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS). UNDP will strengthen
government disaster risk reduction planning and coordination capacity, with a focus
on Zanzibar.
90. The United Nations has a unique global mandate to support humanitarian
action wherever such action is required. It therefore will commit resources to
continue support for camp-based refugees in Tanzania. WFP will take the lead
among the United Nations organizations in ensuring access to food assistance based
on needs. (WFP budgets for food assistance to refugees as part of its Protracted
Relief and Recovery Operations.) UNFPA will support access to high quality,
gender-sensitive sexual and reproductive health and HIV prevention information,
skills and services. UNICEF will provide supplies and services for child health,
education and protection.

IV. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
91. The Development Assistance Plan will be jointly implemented by the United
Nations organizations, the Tanzanian Government and non-State actors within the
framework of the division of labour agreed to in the Joint Assistance Strategy for
Tanzania and in light of the overarching goals of improved national ownership and
effective partnership.
92. Management and institutional arrangements for programme implementation
will utilize national processes and systems. Where relevant, other modalities for
programme implementation will be utilized. The Assistance Plan will conform to the
national annual planning cycle (July to June), thus facilitating the meaningful
participation of the United Nations in national planning and review processes.
93. Organizations will carry out resource-mobilization strategies consistent with
their global mandates and partnership requirements. This work will be
complemented by continued use of the ―one fund‖ to support partnership and
resource mobilization under the Assistance Plan.
94. Sector and programme working groups will undertake all inter-organization
coordination related to planning, monitoring and reporting against the Assistance
Plan.
95. The United Nations organizations will draw upon their respective global and
regional knowledge networks, as well as taking advantage of opportunities for
South-South cooperation. The United Nations organizations and implementing
partners will be jointly accountable for the delivery of Assistance Plan outcomes and
outputs. The mainstreaming of cross-cutting considerations will be assessed as part
of the programme performance criteria. A four-year integrated Assistance Plan
monitoring and evaluation plan will be developed for coordinated, strategic and
joint monitoring of progress. The monitoring and evaluation will be centred on
pre-defined indicators, baselines and annual targets. In addition, a Delive ring as One
monitoring and evaluation matrix, aligned to the 2015 vision for Delivering as One
in Tanzania, will track progress in achieving programmatic and operational
efficiencies.
96. The reporting against Assistance Plan targets will use, where possib le, existing
national systems such as the MKUKUTA monitoring system. As part of the

22

proposed programme, the United Nations organizations will support the
strengthening of national monitoring and evaluation capacities, in order to improve
data availability and quality.
97. The United Nations organizations will report on achievements at the outcome
and output level and a United Nations Development Assistance Plan annual report
will be presented to the joint steering committee of the Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United Nations. This reporting will include:
constraints and challenges faced in implementation processes; lessons learned;
financial expenditures; mainstreaming of cross-cutting considerations; compliance
with the triennial comprehensive policy review and the Paris principles on aid
effectiveness; and measures for the sustainability of the programme beyond the
lifetime of the Assistance Plan global agreements.
98. The Assistance Plan will also will be subject to systematic revie w and, where
necessary, to revision, so as to ensure the continued relevance of United Nations
efforts in Tanzania. An evaluation of the Assistance Plan will be undertaken in the
penultimate year of its implementation, in addition to programme - or organizationspecific evaluations.

23

List of Abbreviations

24

AMP

aid management platform

ANC

antenatal care

APRM

African Peer Review Mechanism

ART

anti-retroviral therapy

ARV

anti-retroviral

AU

African Union

CC

climate change

CCPD

common country programme document

CMT

United Nations country management team

CORPS

community-owned resource persons

CPD

country programme document

CSO

civil society organization

DaO

Delivering as One

DFID

Department for International Development (United Kingdom)

DRR

disaster risk reduction

EAC

East African Community

EIA

environmental impact assessment

EMA

Environment Management Act

EMB

Electoral Management Body

EMoC

emergency maternal obstetric care

FFA

food for assets (programme)

FFE

food for education (programme)

GDP

gross domestic product

HACT

harmonized approach to cash transfers

IMIS

Integrated Management Information System

INSET

in-service teacher training

ITN

insecticide-treated net

JAST

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

LED

local economic development

LGA

local government authority

M&E

Monitoring and Evaluation

MAF

Millennium Development Goals Acceleration Framework

MAIR

MKUKUTA Annual Implementation Report

MDAs

ministries, departments and agencies

MDGR

Millennium Development Goals Report

MKUKUTA

National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (acronym
from Swahili name)

MKUZA

Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan (acronym from Swahili name)

MMS

MKUKUTA Monitoring System

MP

Member of Parliament

NACSAP

National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan

NBS

National Bureau of Statistics

NCPA

National Costed Plan of Action for Most Vulnerable Children

PHDR

Poverty and Human Development Report

PLHIV

people living with HIV and AIDS

PMTCT

prevention of mother-to-child transmission (of HIV)

PRS

poverty reduction strategy

RCU

reform coordination unit

REDD

reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation

SBCC

social and behaviour change communication

SLM

sustainable land management

SME

small and medium-sized enterprise

TACAIDS

Tanzania Commission for HIV/AIDS

UNDAF

United Nations Development Assistance Framework

UNDAP

United Nations Development Assistance Plan

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

WASH

water, sanitation and hygiene

WFP

World Food Programme

ZAC

Zanzibar AIDS Commission

25

26

Annex 1
UNDP results and resources framework for the United Republic of Tanzania,
July 2011-June 2015
Resources for July 2011-June 2015:

Regular: $43,050,000

Others: $59,913,000 Total: $102,963,000

Programme Component: Poverty Reduction (including achieving the Millennium Development Goals)
MKUUTA Goal 1.2 Reducing income poverty through promoting inclusive, sustainable and employment -enhancing growth
MKUZA Goal 1.2 Promote sustainable and equitable pro-poor and broad-based growth
UNDAP Outcomes
UNDAP Outputs
Indicator, Baseline & Targets
Key Partners
Indicative
Resources
(in US dollars)
Key national institutions
Select national policies
Indicator: MDAs incorporate
Ministry of Finance and
Regular
develop/enhance
incorporate strategies for
sectoral policies consistent with
Economic Affairs; Planning
4,215,000
evidence-based pro-poor
enhancing job-rich
national pro-poor strategies
Commission; Zanzibar
economic development
dividends and poverty
Baseline: tourism policy;
Ministry of Finance and
Other
policies and strategies
reduction
agricultural policy; Kilimo Kwanza
Economic Affairs
800,000
strategy document; employment
policy; trade policy: there is no longterm growth plan; national capacity
development plan
Target: MDAs incorporate sectoral
policies consistent with national propoor strategies
Relevant MDAs, LGAs
Relevant MDAs, LGAs
Indicator: LGAs supported in LED
Attorney General’s
Regular
and non-State actors
and private sector
plans
Chambers; Ministry of
1,810,000
enhance structures and
collaborate in promoting
Baseline: Mapping of LED-related
Industry Trade and
policies for promoting
investment and local
institutions identifying their
Marketing; local
Other
viable pro-poor business
economic development
mandates and functional
government; Planning
400,000
sectors and SMEs
assignments; analysis of macro
Commission; private sector
policies related to LED
foundation; Zanzibar
Target: Guidelines for private and
Business Council; Zanzibar
public investment-targeting prepared Investment Promotion
and adopted
Authority; Zanzibar
Ministry of Tourism, Trade
and Industry

Relevant institutions
improve national
capacities to promote
regional integration and
international trade

Trade mainstreamed in
key plans and strategies of
selected MDAs with more
products, goods and
services integrated along
the value chains within
the country and EAC;
relevant institutions and
MDAs harmonize traderelated instruments,
services, standards and
policies to smooth EAC
integration and
competitiveness

Indicator: Effective coordination of
trade-related initiatives by Ministry
of Industry and Trade
Baseline: Weak coordination
capacity
Target: National dialogue on state of
trade development in Tanzania held

Ministry of Industry Trade
and Marketing; Tanzania
Chamber of Commerce,
Industry and Agriculture;
Zanzibar Ministry of
Tourism, Trade and
Industry; Zanzibar Chamber
of Commerce, Industry and
Agriculture; EAC; Ministry
of East Africa Cooperation;
Zanzibar Ministry of
Tourism, Trade and
Industry; academia;
Enhanced Integrated
Framework

Programme Component: Environment and Energy for Sustainable Development
MKUKUTA Goal 1.4 Ensuring food security and climate change adaptation and mitigation
MKUZA Goal 1.2 Promote sustainable and equitable pro-poor and broad-based growth
MKUKUTA Goal 1.5 Allocating and utilizing national resources equitably and efficiently for growth and poverty reduction,
especially in rural areas
MKUZA Goal 1.2 Promote sustainable and equitable pro-poor and broad-based growth
Key MDAs and LGAs
National capacity and
Indicator: # of CC resilience
Vice President’s Office
integrate CC adaptation
strategies for CC
initiatives that address risks
Division of Environment; Prime
and mitigation in
adaptation in place
vulnerability and CC impacts;
Minister’s Office; regional
strategies and plans
Baseline: Consolidated information
administration; local
on climate risk vulnerability, CC
government; Japan; DFID
impacts and adaptation options in
place
Target: At least 4 CC resilience
initiatives implemented in the
coastal, semi-arid and semi-humid
zones
National capacity to adopt Indicator: Manufacturing and
Vice President’s Office Division of
and implement mitigation
tourism enterprises incorporate lowEnvironment; Ministry of
strategies for a lowcarbon and energy efficient
Energy and Minerals;
carbon and resourcetechnologies
UNIDO
efficient development
Baseline: Minimal enterprise
path enhanced
adoption of low-carbon and energy
efficient technologies
Target: 3 additional enterprises
incorporating low-carbon and energy
efficient technologies for the first
time (12 in total)

Regular
1,900,000
Other
2,350,000

Regular
1,580,000
Other
4,050,000

Regular
3,770,000
Other
11,300,000

27

28

Relevant MDAs, LGAs
and non-State actors
improve enforcement of
environment laws and
regulations for the
protection of ecosystems,
biodiversity, and the
sustainable management
of natural resources

National governance
framework for REDD and
capacity to manage
programmes for reducing
the loss of forest carbon in
place
National and local levels
have enhanced capacity to
coordinate, enforce and
monitor environment and
natural resources

Technical, financial and
governance capacities for
sustainable land and forest
management enhanced
Improved capacity for
sustainable management
of protected areas, coastal
forest and marine
ecosystems, including
policy and regulatory
frameworks

Indicator: REDD issues incorporated
Vice
into national policy
Baseline: No REDD strategy; REDD
issues are new to the country
Target: National REDD strategy
implemented as per agreed schedule
Indicator: LGAs formulate
environment plans and strategies in
line with EMA
Baseline: Minimal understanding of
environment issues among LGAs
Target: Support to LGAs to
formulate environment plans and
strategies in line with EMA
Indicator: # of key policies
mainstreaming SLM
Baseline: Few key policies
mainstream SLM
Target: At least three additional
policies mainstream SLM
Indicator: Business plans show
improved financial scorecard for
national system of coastal forest
protected areas and target landscapes
(Rufiji, Kilwa, Lindi and Zanzibar)
Baseline: No business plans for
coastal forest protected areas
Target: Business plans implemented
in coastal forest protected areas and
target landscapes (Rufiji, Kilwa,
Lindi and Zanzibar)

President’s Office Division of
Environment; Ministry of
Natural Resources and
Tourism; UNEP; FAO;
Norway

Regular
1,200,000

Vice President’s Office
Division of Environment;
Prime Minister’s Office;
regional administration; local
government; UNEP; Global
Environment Facility

Regular
1,210,000

Vice President’s Office
Division of Environment; Prime
Minister’s Office; regional
administration; local
government; UNEP; Global
Environment Facility
Vice President’s Office
Division of Environment;
Ministry of Natural Resources
and Tourism; Global
Environment Facility

Regular
1,360,000

Programme Component: HIV/AIDS
MKUKUTA Goal 2.3 Improving survival, health and well being of all children, women and vulnerable groups
MKUZA Goal 2.2 Improved health delivery systems particularly to the most vulnerable groups
Relevant CSO and
CSOs, including PLHIV
Indicator: CSOs, including PLHIV
National Council of NGOs;
PLHIV networks
umbrella organizations
umbrella organizations and
National Council of PLHIV;
effectively coordinate
and networks, coordinate
networks, effectively coordinate
TACAIDS; ZAC; Zanzibar
and participate in
their constituencies and
their constituencies
Association of PLHIV; private
decision-making forums
operationalize
Baseline: Limited communication
sector; Zanzibar Ministry of
participatory processes
within networks; limited internal
Health and Social Welfare;
capacities; limited strategic guidance Prime Minister’s Office;
to CSOs
regional administration; local
Target: Networks participating in
government; Chief Minister’s
CSO forum; each network has a
Office; participating UN
functional internal communication
organizations
mechanism; strategic plans for key
networks have achieved 20% of their
targets, according to agreed schedule

Other
4,100,000

Other
4,100,000

Other
4,900,000
Regular
1,433,000
Other
5,350,000

Regular
850,000
Other
588,000

TACAIDS and ZAC
provide effective
guidance to the national
HIV/AIDS response,
based on evidence and
per agreed human rights
standards

Existing M&E systems
and sector reviews
optimized to provide
strategic information to
decision makers and
implementers at all levels
for evidence-based
planning
TACAIDS and ZAC have
appropriate technical
capacity to support
MDAs, LGAs and nonState actors to mainstream
human rights and gender
considerations in the
national response to
HIV/AIDS

Appropriate policies and
guidelines for an
enhanced HIV & AIDS
response are developed
and disseminated;
TACAIDS and ZAC
mobilize resources and
provide leadership,
coordination and
oversight of recipients and
stakeholders

Indicator: LGA managers (women
and men) and selected district-level
HIV M&E implementers trained
Baseline: Revised M&E system
established; 50% of selected HIV
M&E implementers trained in datacollection tools and guidelines:
Target: 100% of selected HIV M&E
implementers trained in datacollection tools and guidelines
Indicator: Staff in TACAIDS and
ZAC trained in mainstreaming
human rights, gender and key
population concerns in strategic
plans
Baseline: Less than 10% of staff in
TACAIDS and ZAC trained in
mainstreaming human rights, gender
and key population concerns in
strategic plans
Target: 80% of staff in TACAIDS
and ZAC trained in mainstreaming
human rights, gender and key
population concerns in strategic
plans
Indicator: Regional and district
offices receive the necessary policy
and guidelines documents
(prevention strategy, PMTCT, male
circumcision guidelines, global HIV
and AIDS policy)
Baseline: Policy and guidelines
regularly developed and reviewed;
minimal dissemination of policies
and guidelines to regional and
district offices
Target: 90% of regional and district
offices in receipt of updated policies
and guidelines

Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare; TACAIDS; ZAC;
Zanzibar Ministry of Health and
Social Welfare

Regular
950,000

Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare; TACAIDS; ZAC;
Zanzibar Ministry of Health and
Social Welfare; Prime
Minister’s Office; regional
administration; local
government; Chief Minister’s
Office; participating UN
organizations

Regular
1,350,000

Ministry of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs, Ministry
of Health and Social Welfare;
TACAIDS; ZAC; Zanzibar
Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare; Prime Minister’s
Office; regional administration;
local government; Chief
Minister’s Office, participating
UN organizations

Regular
1,300,000

Other
421,000

Other
1,000,000

Other
1,444,000

29

30

Programme Component: Democratic Governance
MKUKUTA Goal 3.1 Ensuring systems and structures of governance uphold the rule of law and are democratic, effective, accountable, predictable,
transparent, inclusive and corruption-free at all levels
MKUKUTA Goal 3.2 Improving public service delivery to all, especially to the poor and vulnerable
MKUKUTA Goal 3.3 Promoting and protecting human rights for all, particularly for poor women, children, men and the vulnerable
MKUZA Goal 3.3 Strengthen the rule of law, respect for human rights and access to justice
MKUZA Goal 3.4 Improve democratic institutions and national unity
Relevant MDAs advance key
Anti-corruption and
Indicator: NACSAP III
Ministry of Justice and
Regular
national strategies for good
other select core
operational
Constitutional Affairs,
7,500,000
governance
reforms strengthened;
Baseline: Implementation of
Zanzibar Ministry of
select public sector
NACSAP II under way
Constitutional Affairs and
Other
reforms in Zanzibar are
Target: NACSAP III implemented
Good Governance; Ministry of
1,600,000
developed and
(including recommendations of
Community Development
accelerated
NACSAP II) as per plan
Gender and Children;
Indicator: New workplan for core
Prevention and Combating of
RCU implemented
Corruption Bureau; Prime
Baseline: No comprehensive RCU Minister’s Office; Zanzibar
workplan
Ministry of Labour, Youth,
Target: RCU meets regularly as
Women and Children
per workplan requirements
Development; Ministry of
Finance; Sweden; Canada;
DFID
Leads to more effective aid
A national strategy and
Indicator: JAST for aid
Ministry of Finance; Ministry
Regular
management and aid
action plan for aid
effectiveness implemented
of Finance and Economic
2,062,000
coordination
effectiveness is adopted
Baseline: No JAST II
Affairs; Zanzibar & Mainland;
and implemented by
Target: JAST II operational as per
DFID
Other
Government and
agreed schedule
900,000
development partners;
the aid management
system is improved to
better incorporate
reporting and
dissemination of
relevant data; national
leadership in the
dialogue structure is
strengthened and donor
coordination improved
Select MDAs and LGAs have
The Planning
Indicator: % of President’s Office Ministry of Finance; Ministry
Regular
increased capacity for
Commission plays an
Planning Commission and key
of Finance and Economic
1,350,000
planning, budgeting,
active role in improved
staff from Prime Minister ’s
Affairs; Prime Minister’s
monitoring and reporting
national policy
Office, Ministry of Finance and
Office; President’s Office
Other
coherence
Economic Affairs; Ministry of
Planning Commission
850,000
Industry Trade and Marketing;
and Ministry of Agriculture
Forestry and Food Security
trained on policy and analytical
issues

Tanzanian Government
advances fulfilment of its
international treaty obligations

Key institutions effectively
implement their election and
political functions

An effective national
development
(MKUKUTA and
MKUZA) monitoring
and reporting system is
operationalized;
capacities of selected
MDAs and LGAs are
developed in areas of
poverty and policy
analysis, public finance
and management
A comprehensive
national human rights
action plan is developed

The National Assembly
and House of
Representatives better
fulfil their
representative,
legislative and oversight
responsibilities; MPs
effectively oversee the
monitoring and analysis
of the PRSs

Baseline: No training plan for
policy and analytical issues in
place
Target: 70% of President’s Office
Planning Commission and key
staff from Prime Minister ’s
Office, Ministry of Finance and
Economic Affairs; Ministry of
Industry Trade and Marketing;
and Ministry of Agriculture
Forestry and Food Security
trained on policy
and analytical issues
Indicator: MMS reports
incorporate sector-specific
statistics
Baseline: Biannual PHDR, annual
MAIR
Target: Timely and improved
MAIR 2013/14, timely and
improved PHDR 2014, timely and
improved MDGR 2014

Indicator: National human rights
action plan developed
Baseline: No national human
rights action plan
Target: Comprehensive national
human rights action plan adopted
and ready for implementation
Indicator: Annual PRS review by
National Assembly and House of
Representatives; Baseline: No
reviews undertaken
Target: Annual Parliamentary
reports and recommendations
produced

Ministry of Finance, Ministry
of Finance and Economic
Affairs (Mainland and
Zanzibar); DFID; general
budget support (GBS) partners

Regular
11,200,000

Commission for Human Rights
and Good Governance; CSOs;
Ministry of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs

Regular
760,000

National Assembly; House of
Representatives

Regular
6,723,000

Other
1,500,000

Other
800,000

Other
2,000,000

31

32

Election management
bodies better manage
the election cycle
through the application
of integrated
management systems
Political parties develop
comprehensive policy
platforms; political
parties improve internal
party democracy;
women assume
leadership roles and
positions in politics
APRM results improved
and EAC governance
development supported

Indicator: % of recommendations
from post-election evaluations on
which action taken by EMBs;
Baseline: Recommendations from
post-election evaluations
Target: Action taken on 100% of
recommendations (2014)
Indicator: Parties publish updated
policy platforms
Baseline: 5 principal parties
produce policy platforms
Target: Policy platforms available

National Assembly; House of
Representatives; Netherlands;
Norway; Sweden; DFID

National Electoral
Commission; Prime Minister’s
Office, regional administration
and local government;
Zanzibar Electoral Commission

Regular
3,540,000

Indicator: A Government response
to the APRM country
report/action plan
Baseline: 0 reports to AU
Target: Government reports to AU
Indicator: Meetings with EAC
governance institutions conducted
Baseline: 0 meetings
Target: UN quarterly meetings
with EAC governance institutions

CSOs; political parties;
registrar for political parties

Regular
610,000

Programme Component: Crisis Prevention and Recovery
MKUKUTA Goal 3.4 Ensuring national and personal security and safety of properties
MKUZA
Goal 3.3 Strengthen the rule of law, respect for human rights and access to justice
Prime Minister’s office and
Operational framework
Indicator: National operational
Chief Minister’s office
and dialogue structure for
guidelines in place and evaluated
disaster management
implementation of the
Baseline: Guidelines for Mainland
departments effectively lead
disaster management
need updating following review;
emergency preparedness and
policies in Mainland and
guidelines for Zanzibar not yet in
response with a focus on
Zanzibar in place;
place
areas most susceptible to
community conflict
Target: Updated national
disasters; select communities prevention and resolution
operational guidelines for both
participate in democratic and dialogue structures
Mainland and Zanzibar in place,
peaceful discourse
established in select areas
reviewed and evaluated

Regular
6,020,000
Other
10,000,000

Other
850,000

Other
100,000

Prime Minister’s office and
Chief Minister’s office disaster
management departments;
CSOs; Ministry of Ministry of
Home Affairs; Ministry of
Justice and Constitutional
Affairs; Zanzibar

Regular
2,250,000
Other
500,000

Annex 2
UNFPA results and resources framework for the United Republic of Tanzania,
2011-2015
Indicative resources: Total $33.85 million: $18.8 million (regular resources); $0.8 million (programme coordination
and assistance); $14.25 million (other resources)
UNFPA p rogramme comp on ent : p opulation and development
N ational strategies for growth and reduction of poverty: Mainland (MKUKUTA) goal 1.2: Reducing income poverty through promoting inclusive,
sustainable and employment-enhancing growth; Zanzibar (MKUZA) goal 1.2: Promote sustainable and equitable pro -poor and broad-based growth
United Nations Development Assistance Plan (UNDAP) strategic area: economic growth
UNFPA strategic plan (goal 1): systematic use of population dynamics analyses to guide increased investments in gender equality, youth development,
reproductive health and HIV/AIDS for improved quality of life and sustainable development and poverty reduction
UNDAP outcome: Key national institutions develop and enhance evidence-based, pro-poor economic development policies and strategies
UNDAP outputs
Indicators, baselines and targets
Partners
Relevant ministries, departments and
agencies, higher learning institutions
and other research institutions utilize
population variables in developing
sector policies and plans

Indicator: percentage of planned surveys conducted on time
Baseline: to be determined; Target: 100%
Indicator: percentage of survey reports with appropriately
disaggregated data; Baseline: to be determined; Target: 100%
Indicator: number of social sector ministries that incorporate
sex, age, education, income and geographical location
variables in economic and development plans. Baseline: to be
determined; Target: all social sector ministries

National Bureau of Statistics,
Prime Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government; Zanzibar
office of the Chief Government
Statistician, Zanzibar Ministry
of Finance and Economic
Affairs, academia

Indicative
resources
$5 million
from regular
resources;
$3 million
from other
resources

U N F PA p ro g r a m me c o mp o n e n t: r eproductive health and rights
National strategies for growth and reduction of poverty: Mainland (MKUKUTA) goals: 2.3: improving the survival, health and we ll-being of all children,
women and vulnerable groups; and 3.4: ensuring national and personal security and safety of properties. Zanzibar (MKUZA) goal s: 2.2: improved healthdelivery systems, particularly for the most vulnerable groups; and 3.3: strengthen the r ule of law, respect for human rights and access to justice
UNDAP strategic area: health, HIV and AIDS, emergencies and refugees
UNFPA strategic plan (goal 2): universal access to reproductive health by 2015 and to comprehensive HIV prevention by 2010 for improved quality of life
UNDAP outcome: Relevant ministries, departments, agencies and local government administrations develop, implement and monitor policies, plans and
budgets for the effective delivery of health services
UNDAP outputs
Indicators, baselines and targets
Partners
Indicative
resources
Ministries of Health and Social
Welfare and local government
administrations’ capacity to plan,
implement, monitor and evaluate the
One Plan for Maternal, Newborn and
Child Health is improved

Indicator: percentage of comprehensive council health plans
with increased allocations for maternal, neonatal and child
health activities; Baseline: to be determined; Target: at least
25% increase
Indicator: percentage of health centres providing basic
emergency obstetric and newborn care, and adolescent
friendly health services; Baseline: 22%; Target: 40%

Central medical stores, Prime
Minister’s Office, Ministries of
Health and Social Welfare,
development partners, civil
society, non-governmental and
faith-based organizations

$11.75
million from
regular
resources;
$10.25
million from
other
resources

33

34

UNDAP outcome: Tertiary and district health facilities in Zanzibar increase the coverage of quality emergency obstetric care, newborn, child and post-natal
services
Tertiary and district health facilities in Indicator: percentage of facilities with increased facilityCentral medical stores, Ministries of Health and
Zanzibar are equipped to provide
based deliveries; Baseline: to be determined; Target: 90%
Social Welfare, local government administrations,
quality emergency obstetric care,
Indicator: percentage of service-delivery points with at least
development partners, civil society organizations
newborn and postnatal services
three modern methods of contraception in stock consistently;
and non-governmental organizations
Baseline: to be determined; Target: at least 50%
UNDAP outcome: Ministries of Health and Social Welfare, local government administrations and shehias (villages) strengthen community health structures
and communication strategies for promoting health and nutrition behaviour
Evidence-based, integrated
Indicator: percentage of health facilities providing adolescent
Prime Minister’s Office - Regional
communication strategies for
sexual and reproductive health services; Baseline: to be
Administration and Local Government, Ministries
improving behaviour and the uptake
determined; Target: increase of at least 20%
of Health and Social Welfare, development
of services, including adolescent
Indicator: new family planning acceptors in targeted regions;
partners, civil society, non-governmental and
health and nutrition, are developed
Baseline: to be determined; Target: 30% increase
faith-based organizations
and implemented
UNDAP outcome: Ministries of Health and Social Welfare and local government administrations develop human resources for health policy and plans
Alternative approaches to health
Indicator: percentage of health facilities implementing task
Prime Minister’s Office, Ministries of Health and
worker skills development and
shifting model in selected districts; Baseline: to be
Social Welfare, civil society, non-governmental
utilization are in place
determined; Target: to be determined, based on task shifting
and faith-based organizations, academia,
model and district-specific action plan
professional associations and training institutes
UNDAP outcome: An effective national integrated supply chain and management system for medical supplies is operationalized
Medical supply systems for
Indicator: percentage of districts using computerized stock
Central medical stores, Ministries of Health and
quantification, procurement, storage
management systems to forecast contraceptives;
Social Welfare, local government administrations,
and distribution are accurate, centrally Baseline: 0; Target: 40% of districts
development partners, Prime Minister ’s Office
linked and computerized
UNDAP outcome: Tanzania AIDS Commission and Zanzibar AIDS Commission provide effective guidance to the national HIV/AIDS resp onse, based on
evidence and per agreed human rights standards
Existing monitoring and evaluation
Indicator: Number of studies conducted and reports
Ministries of Health and Social Welfare,
systems and sector reviews are
disseminated to decision makers and implementers during the
Parliament, Prime Minister’s Office - Regional
optimized to provide strategic
country programme cycle; Baseline: 0. Target: 5
Administration and Local Government, Tanzania
information to decision makers and
and Zanzibar AIDS commissions, Ministry of
implementers at all levels for
Community Development, Gender and Children;
evidence-based planning
Zanzibar Ministry of Social Welfare, Women’s
Development and Children, Ministry of
AIDS commissions have appropriate
Indicator: percentage of social sector HIV reports
Education and Vocational Training, academia,
technical capacity to support
documenting human rights, gender and youth-specific
civil society and faith-based organizations,
ministries, departments and agencies,
activities; Baseline: to be determined; Target: 100%
development partners
local government administrations, and
non-state actors to mainstream human
rights and gender considerations in
the national response to HIV/AIDS
UNDAP outcome: Selected ministries, departments and agencies, local government administrations and non-state actors implement evidence-based HIV
prevention programmes

National and subnational coordination
mechanisms for HIV prevention are
functional and guide implementation
of the national multisectoral
prevention strategy
Selected ministries, departments,
agencies, local government
administrations and civil society
organizations implement their HIV
prevention interventions aligned with
the national multisectoral prevention
strategy
Quality and coverage of behaviour
change communication interventions
for young people are operationalized,
expanded and evaluated

Indicator: percentage of annual sector reports submitted
reflecting implementation of their HIV prevention strategy;
Baseline: to be determined; Target: 60%
Indicator: Number of life skills implementers for out-ofschool youth utilizing the national life skills training manual;
Baseline: to be determined; Target: All implementers

Local government administrations, Ministries of
Health and Social Welfare, Prime Minister’s
Office - Regional Administration and Local
Government, Tanzania AIDS Commission,
Ministry of Community Development, Gender
and Children, Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training, civil society, faith-based and
non-governmental organizations, media and
professional associations

Indicator: percentage of young people in selected high
prevalence regions using a condom at their last high-risk
sexual encounter; Baseline: 30% male, 43% female; Target:
20% increase in each category

UNDAP outcome: Ministries, departments and agencies and civil society organizations reach and mobilize most -at-risk populations to utilize appropriate
user-friendly HIV/AIDS services
Ministries, departments and agencies,
Indicator: number of facilities providing comprehensive HIV
Ministries of Health and Social Welfare, Zanzibar
and civil society organizations
and AIDS services for most-at-risk populations in line with
AIDS Commission, Zanzibar Ministry of Social
provide user-friendly HIV and AIDS
standard guidelines; Baseline: 0. Target: 4 facilities
Welfare, Women’s Development and Children,
services to most-at- risk populations
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training,
civil society, faith-based and non-governmental
Zanzibar AIDS Commission,
Indicator: percentage of civil society organizations and
organizations, media and development partners
ministries, departments and agencies,
government health facilities providing sexual and
and civil society organizations
reproductive health/HIV services to young people; Baseline:
implement programmes to link most0; Target: 30%.
at-risk populations to available
services and reduce risk behaviour in
young people
Communication and advocacy
Indicator: communication and advocacy strategy reflecting
strategies to promote the utilization of service utilization by people living with HIV and other
HIV/AIDS services by people living
vulnerable groups is available; Baseline: 0; Target:
with HIV, most vulnerable children
communication and advocacy strategy in use
and others are operationalized
UNDAP outcome: Disaster management departments of the Prime Minister ’s Office and the Chief Minister’s Office effectively lead emergency
preparedness and response, with a focus on areas most susceptible to disasters
Operational framework and dialogue
Indicator: national operational guidelines for disaster
Prime Minister’s Office - Regional
structure for implementation of the
management reflect reproductive health, gender and
Administration and Local Government, Zanzibar
disaster management policies in the
population concerns; Baseline: concerns not reflected. Target:
Chief Minister’s Office, disaster management
mainland and in Zanzibar are in place
concerns reflected in national guidelines
departments
UNDAP outcome: Relevant ministries, departments and agencies, local government administrations, and non -state actors are prepared, have adequate
sectoral capacity and provide an effective, coordinated response in water, sanitation and hygiene, health, education, protect ion, agriculture, food security
and nutrition in emergencies

35

36

Ministries of Health and Social
Welfare coordination mechanism for
health in emergencies is functional
and has enhanced response capacity
UNDAP outcome: Refugees have access

Indicator: percentage of emergency health stocks
prepositioned to provide reproductive health services;
Baseline: 0; Target: 100%

Ministries of Health and Social Welfare, civil
society, faith-based and non-governmental
organizations, Tanzania Red Cross Society

to basic services and protection in line with international norms and standards

Refugees’ access to quality, genderIndicator: percentage of refugees accessing sexual and
sensitive sexual and reproductive
reproductive health services;
health and sexual gender-based
Baseline: 90%. Target: 100%
violence services according to the
minimum initial service package is
enhanced
UNFPA programme component: gender equality

Disaster management departments of the Prime
Minister’s Office and the Chief Minister’s Office,
Ministries of Health and Social Welfare, civil
society, faith-based and non-governmental
organizations, Tanzania Red Cross Society and
local governments

National strategies for growth and reduction of poverty for Tanzania: Mainland (MKUKUTA) goals 2.6 and 3.1: Ensuring systems and structures of
governance uphold the rule of law and are democratic, effective, accountable, predictable, transparent, inclusive and corrupt ion-free at all levels; 3.3:
Promoting and protecting human rights for all, particularly for poor women, children, men and the vulnerable. Zanzibar (MKUZA) goals 2.6 and 3.3:
Strengthen the rule of law, respect for human rights and access to justice
UNDAP strategic areas: social protection and governance
UNFPA strategic plan (goal 3): gender equality advanced and young girls empowered to exercise their human rights, particularly their reproductive rights,
and live free from discrimination and violence
UNDAP outcome: Government addresses priority gaps in legislation, strategies and guidelines to pro tect children and women from abuse, violence and
exploitation
UNDAP outputs
Indicators, baselines and targets
Partners
Indicative
resources
Increased response to gender-based
Indicator: number of community gender-based violence
Parliament, Zanzibar Ministry
$2.05 million
violence by law enforcement agents
committees competent to respond to cases; Baseline: to be
of Social Welfare, Women’s
from regular
determined; Target: At least a two-fold increase from the
Development and Children;
resources;
baseline
Ministry of Community
$1 million from
Development, Gender and
other resources
Children; Faith-based, nongovernmental and civil society
organizations, the media and
professional associations
UNDAP outcome: Government advances the fulfilment of its international treaty obligations
Adherence to key treaties and the
Indicator: report on the Convention on the Elimination of All
Commission for Human Rights and Good
universal periodic review is
Forms of Discrimination against Women submitted on time;
Governance, relevant ministries, faith-based,
continuously monitored, reported on
Baseline: 2008 report on the Convention combines three
non-governmental and civil society
and relevant commissions’
reports into one report; Target: 2012 single report submitted on organizations, private sector, trade unions and
observations are followed up
time
the media
UNDAP outcome: Government justice system better protects the rights of women and children in contact or in conflict with the law and is better able to
respond to their needs
An effective, gender-sensitive legal
Indicator: number of gender-based violence cases reported
Prime Minister’s Office, Parliament, academia,
framework to address gender-based
annually; Baseline: to be determined; Target: at least 10%
professional associations, Commission for
violence is in place
annual increase in reported cases
Human Rights and Good Governance, relevant
ministries, media, faith-based, non-governmental
and civil society organizations

Annex 3
UNICEF programme of cooperation with the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania, 2011-2015: summary results matrix and summary budget table
More comprehensive data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org .
Summary results matrix
Programme
component (and
related focus area
of the mediumterm strategic
plan)
Child and
maternal health
and nutrition

Programme component results
(UNDAP outcomes with UNICEF
contributions)

Key progress indicators, baselines and targets
(for each programme component result)

Major partners,
partnership frameworks
and cooperation
programmes

37

Strengthen national health systems, maternal and newborn care, community-based health care and early childhood development, as
well as nutrition, for scaled-up delivery of health and nutrition services, to accelerate child survival and development gains and
improve maternal health
Ministry of Health and Social
Indicator: comprehensive council health plans (CCHPs) in
United Nations
Welfare and local government
selected LGAs targeting interventions as per gaps identified at
World Health Organization
authorities (LGAs) produce quality
annual reviews. Verification: CCHP, annual review reports.
(WHO), UNFPA, WFP
and timely data for evidence-based
Baseline: to be determined (TBD). Target: CCHPs in more than
Government
planning and decision-making.
(>) 70 per cent (%) of selected LGAs targeting interventions as
Prime Minister’s Office —
per gaps identified at annual reviews.
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
Ministry of Health and Social
Indicator: Health Promotion Unit of Ministry of Health and
of Health and Social
Welfare, LGAs and Shehias
Social Welfare implementing the health and nutrition
(subdistricts) strengthen
communication strategy. Verification: assessment report; partner Welfare, Ministry of
Agriculture, Food and
community health structures and
report; communication strategy; opinion survey. Baseline: no
communication strategies for
communication strategy. Target: targets for first implementation Cooperatives, Ministry of
Community Development,
promoting health and nutrition
phase of communication strategy met.
Gender and Children,
behaviours.
Indicator: infants aged less than (<) 6 months in targeted LGAs
Ministry of Education and
who are exclusively breastfed. Verification: evaluation report.
Vocational Training,
Baseline: TBD. Target: 50% increase.
Ministry of Industry, Trade
Indicator: proportion of pregnant women in targeted regions
and Marketing, Ministry of
delivered by skilled health personnel. Verification: service
Labour, Employment and
statistics and survey reports. Baseline: TBD. Target: 30%
Youth Development,
increase.
Ministry of Finance and
Relevant ministries, departments
Indicator: nutrition institutional arrangements established and
Economic Affairs, Tanzania
and agencies (MDAs) and LGAs
regions having trained nutrition coordinators. Verification:
Food and Drug Authority,
integrate nutrition into policies,
policy/legal document; partner reports. Baseline: unclear division
National Bureau of
plans and budgets and strengthen
of labour between MDAs and LGA structures; no nutrition
Statistics, central medical
institutional arrangements for
coordinators at regional level. Target: All regions have one
stores
delivery of services.
trained nutrition coordinator; National Nutrition Strategy II
Zanzibar Ministry of
approved with clarity in institutional roles.
Agriculture, Livestock and
Indicator: health facilities in targeted districts providing quality
Environment, Zanzibar
nutrition services, as per essential nutrition actions. Verification:
Ministry of Regional
evaluation report. Baseline: TBD. Target: improved quality of
Administration and Special
nutrition services, as per essential nutrition actions.

38

Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare and LGAs develop human
resources for health policy and
plans.
Relevant MDAs and LGAs
develop, implement and monitor
policies, plans and budgets for
effective delivery of health
services.

An effective national integrated
supply chain and management
system for medical supplies is
operationalized.
Water,
sanitation and
hygiene

Indicator: proportion of accredited health institutions providing
priority training. Verification: partner reports. Baseline: needs
assessment to be undertaken and priority training agreed.
Target: 50% of accredited institutions providing the required
training.
Indicator: proportion of comprehensive council and district
health plans that meet the set criteria for approval. Verification:
CCHP review reports. Baseline: TBD. Target: 70%.
Indicator: proportion of health centres providing basic
emergency obstetric and newborn care, adolescent-friendly
health services, Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses.
Verification: service availability, statistics reports; Tanzania
Service Provision Authority. Baseline: 22% (5% for basic).
Target: 70% health-care centres provide basic services.
Indicator: proportion of facilities reporting stock-outs of
medicines, vaccines and contraceptives in selected regions.
Verification: stock management reports. Baseline: limited
information on stock-outs. Target: less than 25% of facilities in
selected regions report stock-outs of medicines, vaccines and
contraceptives.

Departments, Zanzibar
Ministry of Health and
Social Welfare, Zanzibar
Ministry of Labour, Youth,
Women and Children
Development, Zanzibar
Ministry of Tourism, Trade
and Industry, Zanzibar
Office of the Chief
Government Statistician
Other
CSOs, faith-based
organizations (FBOs),
international nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), academia, media,
professional associations,
training institutes,
development partners

Focus on school WASH, household sanitation and hygiene and emergency WASH, for scaled -up and coordinated delivery of evidencebased WASH interventions, to accelerate child survival, education and development
The Government adopts evidencebased measures to enhance
decision-making, equity and
inclusion of women, children and
vulnerable populations in WASH.

The Government implements a
coordinated, scaled-up national
response for improved sanitation
and hygiene.

Relevant MDAs provide a
coordinated, harmonized response
for increased coverage and
improved quality of child-friendly
(esp. girl-friendly) and accessible
school WASH.

Indicator: number of reports or documentation annually
produced for the WASH sector and other key sectoral reports
addressing or responding to equity issues. Verification: Water
Sector Development Programme annual/mid-year report, health
sector programme annual report. Baseline: annual equity report
by Tanzania Water and Sanitation Network (with WaterAid
support). Target: two stand-alone and two key sector reports /
documentation, with equity focus included.
Indicator: donors supporting a national scaled-up response for
improved sanitation and hygiene. Verification: reports to the
National Steering Committee for Sanitation and Hygiene.
Baseline: some money available under Water Sector
Development Programme. Target: two major development
partners/ sector-wide approach funding sanitation and hygiene
in 50% of districts in Tanzania.
Indicator: households in target areas practicing positive WASH
behaviour. Verification: baseline and evaluation report.
Baseline: TBD. Target: 20% increase in targeted areas.
Indicator: national school WASH programme operational.
Verification: Ministry reports. Baseline: initial discussion on
national programme or institutional mechanisms. Target:
national school WASH programme implementation ongoing in
more than 40 districts.

United Nations
UN-Habitat, WHO
Government
Prime Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
of Education and Vocational
Training, Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare, Ministry
of Water and Irrigation,
National Environment
Management Council
Zanzibar Ministry of
Education and Vocational
Training, Zanzibar Ministry
of Health and Social Welfare,
Zanzibar Water Authority,
Zanzibar Bureau of Statistics
Other
Comprehensive Community
Based Rehabilitation of
Tanzania, WaterAid,
academia, research
institutions, University of
Dar es Salaam, CSOs, FBOs,
NGOs

Children and
AIDS

39

Support scale-up of an evidence-based and comprehensive national HIV and AIDS response on PMTCT and paediatric AIDS, HIV
prevention and care, and support for OVC, with a clear focus on children, adolescent s and young people, and other vulnerable groups
Tanzania Commission for AIDS
Indicator: TACAIDS and ZAC have systems for quality data
United Nations
(TACAIDS) and Zanzibar AIDS
management, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge
UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA,
Commission (ZAC) provide
sharing. Verification: systems inventory report; review report.
United Nations Educational,
effective guidance to the national
Baseline: limited data management, monitoring and evaluation
Scientific and Cultural
HIV/AIDS response, based on
and knowledge sharing. Target: improved data availability, data
Organization (UNESCO),
evidence and human rights
quality, and enhanced utilization.
Food and Agricultural
standards.
Indicator: staff in TACAIDS and ZAC trained in mainstreaming
Organization of the United
human rights, gender and key population concerns in strategic
Nations (FAO), United
plans. Verification: gender and human rights audit reports;
Nations Development Fund
medium-term expenditure frameworks. Baseline: less than 10%
for Women (UNIFEM),
of staff in TACAIDS and ZAC trained in mainstreaming human
WFP, WHO
rights, gender and key population concerns in strategic plans.
Government
Target: 80% of staff in TACAIDS and ZAC trained in
Parliament, Prime Minister’s
mainstreaming human rights, gender and key population
Office — Regional
concerns in strategic plans.
Administration and Local
Government, Ministry of
Selected MDAs, LGAs and nonIndicator: proportion of women aged 15-24 years in high
Community Development,
State actors (NSAs) implement
prevalence regions having comprehensive knowledge of HIVGender and Children,
evidence-based HIV prevention
prevention methods. Verification: Demographic and Health
Ministry of Health and
programmes.
Survey (DHS), Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Indicator
Social Welfare, Ministry of
Survey (THMIS); follow-up knowledge, attitudes and practices
Justice and Constitution
(KAP) survey. Baseline: TBD, based on regions selected.
Affairs, Ministry of
Target: >85%.
Education and Vocational
Indicator: proportion of women aged 15-19 years in high
Training, Ministry of
prevalence regions who reported using a condom during last
Labour, Employment and
sexual intercourse. Verification: DHS, THMIS; follow-up KAP
survey. Baseline: TBD, based on regions selected. Target: >50%. Youth Development,
Ministry of Agriculture,
Zanzibar MDAs and CSOs reach
Indicator: proportion of most-at-risk populations, including
Food and Cooperatives,
and mobilize most-at-risk
young people, utilizing appropriate and user friendly services.
Ministry of Livestock
populations to utilize appropriate
Verification: quarterly service coverage reports; annual service
Development and Fisheries,
user-friendly HIV/AIDS services.
coverage reports. Baseline: 8 CSOs and 1 MDA working with
TACAIDS
most-at-risk populations reporting out of those that are working
Zanzibar Ministry of Health
on HIV. Target: 50% of most-at-risk populations reached with
and Social Welfare, Zanzibar
appropriate user-friendly HIV/AIDS services.
Ministry of Labour, Youth,
Relevant MDAs, LGAs and NSAs
Indicator: selected MDAs with medium-term expenditure
Women and Children
effectively operationalize the
frameworks reflecting NPA and strategies for MVCs.
Development, Zanzibar
National Costed Plan of Action
Verification: medium-term expenditure frameworks. Baseline:
Ministry of Education and
(NCPA) for most vulnerable
limited capacity and budget to implement NCPA for MVCs.
Vocational Training,
children (MVC).
Target: increased budgeting of NCPA activities in MDA
Zanzibar AIDS Commission,
budgets, compared to previous year.
Other
Selected MDAs, LGAs and NSAs
Indicator: health-care facilities provide care and treatment
CSOs, FBOs, NGOs,
deliver increased quality of
services, according to national guidelines. Verification:
academia, media,
HIV/AIDS care and treatment
Tanzania Service Provision Authority; annual care and
professional associations
services.
treatment reports. Baseline: no regular assessment and reports
of quality of care and treatment services. Target: increase in
quality care and treatment services provided in targeted regions
according to national guidelines.

40

Child protection

Focus on child justice, child protection systems strengthening and birth registration, to protect children from abuse, exploi tation and
violence in line with government commitments within frameworks of the Law of the Child Act (2009) and the national PRS
The government justice system
protects the rights of women and
children in contact or conflict with
the law, and is better able to
respond to their needs.

MDAs, LGAs, law enforcement
agencies and selected CSOs have
improved technical skills to prevent
and respond to cases of
abuse/violence/exploitation of
children.
The Government addresses priority
gaps in legislation, strategies and
guidelines to protect children and
women from abuse, violence and
exploitation.

Decision makers and communities
understand issues concerning
violence and abuse against
children, including available
protection services.

Indicator: justice system incorporates international standards for
child justice and juvenile justice. Verification: review report;
evaluation report. Baseline: inadequate reflection of
international standards in child and juvenile justice. Target:
increased reflection of international and national standards, as
per implementation strategies.
Indicator: rehabilitation and reintegration services in place in
detention centres and in pilot areas. Verification: partner reports.
Baseline: lack of community prevention, rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes for children to be formally referred,
diverted and sentenced, and a lack of such services in detention
centres. Target: rehabilitation services in place in detention
centres and in the pilot areas and roll-out plans finalized.
Indicator: MDAs, LGAs and other child protection duty bearers
have technical skills to prevent and respond to child protection
issues. Verification: training reports; partner reports. Baseline:
ad hoc training sessions going on. Target: > 80% targets set in
multisectoral capacity-building strategy met.
Indicator: districts with trained duty bearers respond effectively
to child protection issues. Verification: evaluation report.
Baseline: TBD. Target: first-phase districts respond effectively.
Indicator: government legislation, strategies and guidelines
reviewed and adequately address abuse, violence and
exploitation against children. Verification: legislation, strategies
guidelines, assessment report. Baseline: presence of Antitrafficking Act and the Law of the Child Act; no regulations and
implementation strategy; inadequate enforcement of legislation
and regulations with regard to gender-based violence. Target:
government legislation, strategies and guidelines adequately
address abuse, violence and exploitation.
Indicator: national birth registration strategy for children under
5 years approved and operationalized. Verification: strategy
document; evaluation report; and survey data. Baseline: draft
national birth registration strategy for children under 5 years
available. Target: midterm targets of the national birth
registration strategy achieved.
Indicator: referrals of child victims of violence to protection
services. Verification: Department of Social Welfare of Ministry
of Health and Social Welfare, magistrates, police and other
child-protection duty bearer reports. Baseline: TBD. Target: 20%
increase.
Indicator: understanding of decision makers on violence against
children issues and public statements to address these issues.
Verification: KAP survey (baseline, midterm and end of term);
national press and television monitoring. Baseline: TBD. Target:
30% increase in understanding; increase in public statements.

United Nations
International Organization
for Migration, UNFPA,
UNIFEM
Government
Parliament, Prime Minister’s
Office — Regional
Administration and Local
Government, Ministry of
Community Development,
Gender and Children,
Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Health and
Social Welfare, Ministry of
Justice and Constitution
Affairs, Ministry of Labour,
Employment and Youth
Development, Commission
for Human Rights and Good
Governance, National
Bureau of Statistics
Zanzibar Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare, Zanzibar
Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training,
Zanzibar Ministry of Labour,
Youth, Women and Children
Development, Zanzibar
Chief Justice,
Other
CSOs, FBOs, NGOs,
academia, media,
professional associations

Relevant MDAs integrate child
protection into their national
programmes.

MDAs produce, utilize and report
disaggregated data on abuse,
trafficking, exploitation and
violence against women and
children according to agreed
timeframes.
Local service providers respond
effectively to women and child
victims of abuse, violence and
exploitation in select areas.

Education
equity and
quality

Indicator: NCPA-MVC provides response on child protection
issues. Verification: NCPA 2011-2015 evaluation report.
Baseline: 2007-2010 NCPA does not adequately address child
protection issues. Target: increased response to child protection
issues, operationalized by NCPA.
Indicator: Government has a tested strategy to scale up child
protection in Tanzania in relevant MDAs. Verification: pilot
evaluation report; scale-up strategy document. Baseline: pilot
initiated. Target: costed national child protection scale-up
strategy approved.
Indicator: data available on abuse, trafficking, exploitation and
violence against women and children. Verification: survey
reports, sectoral information systems. Baseline: insufficient
disaggregated data on violence, abuse and exploitation of
women and children. Target: increase in data availability from
surveys and sectoral information systems.
Indicator: child and women who are victims of abuse, violence
and exploitation have access to quality protection services.
Verification: local service provider plans; progress reports;
evaluation. Baseline: limited service provision and inadequate
quality of services for women and children who are victims of
abuse, violence and exploitation. Target: increase in access and
quality services provided by targeted local service providers.

Contribute to the realization of MDGs 2 and 3, the United Nations Girls ’ Education Initiative and Education for All through education
systems capacity development, by enhancing learning and the school environment and by focusing on equity, gender and life skills
The Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training expands
provision of alternative learning
opportunities to include less
teacher-dependent learning modes,
focusing on out-of-school children
and illiterate adults.

The Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training improves
quality of teacher education
programmes for basic education in
priority subjects.

Indicator: number and types of additional options available for
alternative learning opportunities. Verification: Ministry of
Education and Vocational Training reports; SITAN report.
Baseline: number and type for alternative learning opportunities
TBD. Target: two additional, feasible options for alternative
learning opportunities, of which one is less teacher-dependent.
Indicator: proportion of females registered in new alternative
learning opportunities programmes. Verification: monitoring
reports. Baseline: 2011 total enrolment TBD. Target: 50% of
learners participating in pilot are female.
Indicator: proportion of districts implementing In-service
Teacher Education (INSET) strategy and its operational
guidelines. Verification: monitoring reports; evaluation report.
Baseline: INSET modules not in place. Target: 50%.
Indicator: proportion of pilot teacher education institutes
meeting Pre-Service Teacher Education (PRESET) curriculum
delivery minimum standards set by Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training. Verification: monitoring reports;
evaluation report. Baseline: PRESET modules not in place.
Target: >70% teacher education institutes.
Indicator: proportion of teachers who completed the INSET
demonstrating Ministry of Education and Vocational Training

United Nations
UNESCO, WFP
Government
Prime Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
of Community Development,
Gender and Children,
Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training,
Tanzania Institute of
Education, Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare
Zanzibar Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare, Zanzibar
Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training,
Zanzibar Ministry of
Regional Administration and
Special Departments,
Zanzibar Ministry of Labour,
Youth, Women and Children

41

42

Relevant MDAs operationalize
national policy on Integrated Early
Childhood Development

Relevant MDAs undertake
evidence-based planning,
management and quality assurance
at national, district, ward and
school levels.

Social policy
analysis and
development

teacher competencies. Verification: inspectorate reports;
evaluation reports; classroom observation reports. Baseline:
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training teacher
competency framework not in place. Target: 40% demonstrating
60% of competencies.
Indicator: oversight mechanism for relevant MDAs to
operationalize Integrated Early Childhood Development policy
in place and functional. Verification: minutes; monitoring
reports; medium-term expenditure framework documents.
Baseline: oversight inadequate, no meetings; no monitoring
reports. Target: two oversight inter-ministerial meetings held
annually.
Indicator: proportion of allocations to low-performing districts.
Verification: medium-term expenditure frameworks. Baseline:
limited evidence base; TBD. Target: increase in allocations to
low-performing districts.
Indicator: districts have evidence-based education plans.
Verification: district education plans. Baseline: limited evidence
base. Target: basic education management information systems
inspectorate data incorporated in district plans.

Development, Zanzibar
districts
Other
CSOs, FBOs, NGOs,
training institutes

Seek to influence the design of policy, legislative and budgetary frameworks, geared towards the realization of children ’s rights,
including in the area of social protection, in an equitabl e manner
Government coordinates a
multisectoral social protection
response to the needs of
economically deprived and insecure
groups.

Government advances fulfilment of
its international treaty obligations.

Indicator: approved National Social Protection Framework
(NSPF) implemented, as per agreed schedule. Verification:
NSPF; implementation plan, review and evaluation reports.
Baseline: NSPF pending adoption; weak coordination across
sectors. Target: national social protection response evaluated
and recommendations shared with all stakeholders.
Indicator: coverage of national social protection interventions to
respond to the needs of economically deprived groups.
Verification: evaluation report. Baseline: limited coverage of
social protection interventions, mostly small-scale, sporadic and
donor-funded. Target: increase in social protection coverage
(national programmes, additional vulnerable groups,
geographical), as per national implementation plan.
Indicator: National Human Rights Action Plan developed.
Verification: National Human Rights Action Plan. Baseline: no
national human rights action Plan; management structure for
National Human Rights Action Plan in place; consultations with
stakeholders started. Target: annual review of National Human
Rights Action Plan conducted; annual targets defined in Action
Plan met; new annual workplan for the National Human Rights
Action Plan set.
Indicator: reports submitted on time to regional and
international bodies. Verification: Convention on the Rights of
the Child, Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, African Charter for the Rights and Welfare of

United Nations
International Labour
Organization, Office of the
High Commissioner for
Human Rights, UNDP,
UNESCO, UNFPA, WFP,
WHO
Government
Prime Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
of Natural Resources and
Tourism, Ministry of
Community Development,
Gender and Children,
Ministry of Education and
Vocational Training,
Ministry of Information,
Culture and Sports, Ministry
of Industry, Trade and
Marketing, Ministry of
Justice and Constitution
Affairs, Ministry of Labour,
Employment and Youth
Development, Ministry of

the Child, state of conservation report, labour-related reports.
Baseline: Convention on the Rights of the Child due in 2012,
state of conservation report; all labour reports due in 2010 were
submitted past deadline. Target: submissions as per established
schedule.

Emergency
preparedness
and response

Agriculture, Food and
Cooperatives, Ministry of
Finance and Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare,
Commission for Human
Rights and Good
Governance
Zanzibar Ministry of
Tourism, Trade and Industry,
Zanzibar Ministry of State,
Finance and Economic
Affairs, Zanzibar Ministry of
Education and Vocational
Training, Zanzibar Ministry
of Labour, Youth, Women
and Children Development,
Zanzibar districts
Other
CSO, FBOs and NGOs,
media, private sector, trade
unions

Support capacity development of the Government to effectively lead national emerge ncy preparedness and response, with a focus on
areas most susceptible to disasters, and provide support to refugee programmes in north -western Tanzania
Communities have access to
improved credible emergency
information to enable early action.

Relevant MDAs, LGAs, and NSAs
are prepared, have adequate
sectoral capacity and provide an
effective intra-coordinated response
in WASH, health, education,
protection, agriculture, food
security and nutrition in
emergencies.
The disaster management
departments of the Prime
Minister’s Office and the Chief
Minister’s Office effectively lead
emergency preparedness and
response, with a focus on areas
most susceptible to disasters.

Indicator: information on emergency preparedness and response
disseminated through local disaster committees. Verification:
field trip reports; LGA reports; food-security assessment reports;
evaluation report. Baseline: insufficient emergency information
for communities; food-security information at national level.
Target: local disaster committees effectively disseminate
information on emergency preparedness and response.
Indicator: relevant sectors providing coordinated emergency
response. Verification: meeting minutes; assessment reports;
training reports by sector; joint evaluation. Baseline: TBD in
June 2011. Target: increased collaborative or coordinated
emergency response to 75% of emergencies with over 50,000
affected people.

43

Indicator: high-risk districts and Shehias with costed emergency
preparedness and response plans. Verification: reports on
response to emergencies in affected regions; copies of plans on
file at Prime Minister’s Office and Chief Minister’s Office.
Baseline: reports from past emergency interventions; some
plans available but not consolidated. Target: 20 emergency
preparedness and response plans at district level operationalized
(5 in Zanzibar Shehias and 15 mainland districts).

United Nations
FAO, UNDP, UNFPA,
United Nations High
Commissioner For Refugees
(UNHCR), WFP, WHO
Government
Prime Minister’s Office,
Prime Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
of Agriculture, Food and
Cooperatives, Ministry of
Education and Vocational
Training, Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare, Ministry
of Livestock Development
and Fisheries, Ministry of
Water and Irrigation,
Ministry of Natural
Resources and Tourism,
Ministry of Home Affairs
Zanzibar Chief Minister’s
Office – Disaster

44

Refugees have access to basic
services and protection in line with
international norms and standards.

Planning,
monitoring and
evaluation

Indicator: proportion of refugees with access to basic services
and protection. Verification: annual UNHCR Standards and
Indicators Report. Baseline: 60,000 refugees in camps have
access to basic services and protection. Target: 90% of an
estimated 20,000 refugees have access to basic services and
protection.

Management Department,
Zanzibar Ministry of Health
And Social Welfare,
Zanzibar Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and
Environment, Zanzibar
Water Authority
Other
Tanzania Red Cross Society,
CSOs, FBOs, NGOs

Strengthen planning, monitoring and evaluation nationally and internally, within the United Nations system, focus on targeting
inequities around children in subnational plans and budgets and increase tracking and reporting of results on children
Select MDAs and LGAs have
increased capacity for planning,
budgeting, monitoring and
reporting.

Indicator: LGAs produce plans and reports following agreed
planning, budgeting, monitoring and reporting quality
standards. Verification: LGA plans and reports. Baseline: TBD,
based on planned evaluation. Target: at least 20 LGAs produce
plans and reports following agreed planning, budgeting,
monitoring and reporting quality standards.

United Nations
United Nations Capital
Development Fund, UNDP,
UNIFEM
Government
President’s Office Planning
Commission, Prime
Minister’s Office —
Regional Administration and
Local Government, Ministry
of Agriculture, Food and
Cooperatives, Ministry of
Community Development,
Gender and Children,
Ministry of Finance and
Economic Affairs, National
Bureau of Statistics
Zanzibar Ministry of State,
Finance and Economic
Affairs
Other
Academia, CSOs, FBOs,
NGOs, private sector

Summary budget table

Programme
Child and maternal health and nutrition

(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular resources
Other resources

Total

15 000

25 670

40 670

Water, sanitation and hygiene

8 000

10 600

18 600

Children and AIDS

6 500

11 380

17 880

Child protection

7 200

12 220

19 420

Education equity and quality

8 500

10 180

18 680

Social policy analysis and development

3 300

540

3 840

Emergency Preparedness and Response

5 000

640

5 640

Communication, advocacy and partnerships

3 800

200

4 000

Planning, monitoring and evaluation

3 300

600

3 900

14 092

1 278

15 370

74 692

73 308

148 000

Cross-sectoral costs
Total

45

Annex 4
WFP United Republic of Tanzania country programme,
2011-2015
WFP TANZANIA COUNTRY PROGRAMME 200200 (2011-2015)
Number of beneficiaries

2,521,400

Duration of project

4 years
(1 July 2011-30 June 2015

WFP food tonnage

239,995 mt
Cost (United States dollars)

WFP food cost

97,206,792

Total cost to WFP

175,025,307

Situation analysis — food security situation 1
1.
The comprehensive food security vulnerability assessment (CFSVA) findings
reveal that poor food consumption, a proxy indicator for food security, is strongly
associated with the ownership of productive assets and vulnerability to shocks
affecting crops and livestock. Households with poor consumption experienced
greater exposure to plant diseases and animal pests, are more likely to be headed by
women, and have low expenditure and wealth index scores. Food -insecure
households own fewer livestock, cultivate fewer crops and do not use modern
inputs.
2.
The country’s food self-sufficiency over the past eight years 2 has ranged
between 88 and 112 percent. 3 Although Tanzania is typically food self-sufficient at
the national level, there are localized food deficits at the regional, district and
household levels. The most food-deficit regions 4 include Arusha, Manyara, Lindi,
Mtwara and Singida; even in years of a national surplus, these regions experience
food deficits. In contrast, regions of Rukwa, Ruvuma, Iringa and Mbeya in the
southern highlands produce surpluses and are regarded as the national granary; these
are the main sources for commercial supplies and a part of the surplus is procured
by the National Food Reserve Agency (NFRA) for government emergency stocks
for deficit areas.
3.
The asymmetrical agricultural production in Tanzania is compounded by poor
market integration, interregional taxation, weak road infrastructure, long distances
between surplus and deficit areas, and cereal export bans. These limits to trade
result in a large difference between prices for the producer and for the consumer,
__________________
1
2
3
4

46

For detailed situation analysis see the common country programme document (CCPD).
2002/03 to 2009/10.
Measured by the ―self-sufficiency ratio‖ (SSR).
SSR below 100 percent.

10-66622

with local cereal prices above import parity levels. High prices affect access to food
for low-income households.
4.
Household agricultural production is low and is characterized by the use of
traditional inputs, hand tools and rain-fed agriculture. There is a low level of land
ownership. Agricultural labour opportunities are seasonal and limited during
droughts, constraining household income and purchasing power. Accelerating land
degradation is of particular concern in food-deficit regions, resulting in increased
susceptibility to climatic shocks, which deepen negative coping strategies, poverty
and seasonal hunger.
5.
The high prevalence of stunting and micronutrient deficiencies, such as iron
deficiency anaemia, are the main nutritional problems. 5 The 2010 Demographic and
Health Survey (DHS) indicates 42 per cent of children under 5 are stunted, 6 4.8 per
cent are wasted and 21 per cent are underweight. The regions of Arusha, Kagera,
Kigoma, Manyara, Mbeya, Morogoro, Mtwara, Mwanza, Ruvuma, Shinyanga,
Singida and Tanga have prevalences of stunting between 35 and 50 percent;
Dodoma, Iringa, Lindi and Rukwa have prevalences over 50 percent. 7 The
prevalence of stunting is significantly higher for boys than for girls and much more
common among rural children.

WFP strategic focus
6.
WFP activities are aligned with Tanzania’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 8
and the United Nations Development Assistance Plan (UNDAP) July 2011 -June
2015, and integrated in the CCPD. 9 The PRS is designed to address gaps in attaining
the Millennium Development Goals, prioritizing agriculture, food security and
nutrition security as key drivers for growth. The Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP) compact was signed in July 2010 and WFP will
support the Government to implement the CAADP investment plan, with specific
attention to Pillar 3, Food supply and hunger.
7.
The WFP activities are based on the WFP Country Strategy 2011 -2015,
focusing on: (i) ensuring continuity and building on experience and best practices
from previous programmes; (ii) prioritizing food-insecure areas and the most
vulnerable households; (iii) supporting a demand-driven and participatory approach;
(iv) enhancing strategic and local partnerships; (v) ensuring alignment and coherence
with government policies and strategies related to agricultural development, nutrition
and food security; (vi) supporting the government goals for environmental
sustainability and climate change adaptation/mitigation; (vii) equitable access to
__________________
5
6
7

8
9

See the CCPD.
Height-for-age below -2 standard deviation.
National Bureau of Statistics and ORC Macro. 2010. Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey,
2010. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Calverton, MD, United States of America.
MKUKUTA II and MKUZA II
WFP’s Executive Board Bureau agreed at its 14 September 2010 meeting to align with the other
United Nations funds and programmes, submitting the draft CCPD at its First Regular Session
of 2011 for approval at its Annual Session of 2011. The CCPD is in line with the United Nations
Development Group (UNDG) Common Framework for the Country Programme Outline and
Country Programme Document, the four agencies’ June 2010 decisions and United Nations
General Assembly Resolution A/RES/64/289.

47

quality education at all levels for boys and girls; (viii) improving survival, health,
nutrition and well-being, especially for children, women and other vulnerable
groups; and (ix) providing adequate social protection and rights to vulnerable groups .
8.

The WFP country programme will focus on the following two priorities: 10

• Food security and nutrition support (Strategic Objectives 2, 4 and 5)11 for
people living in environmentally fragile and chronically food-insecure
areas who face recurrent hunger periods, struggle to access food and to
meet their basic food and nutrition needs, are more vulnerable to shocks
and require direct assistance. Focused around productive safety nets and
nutrition, activities include food for education (FFE), food for assets
(FFA) and nutrition support.
• Investments in community food and nutrition security (Strategic
Objectives 2 and 5) for communities that are able to meet their basic
food and nutrition needs but require further investment to ensure future
food security and reduced vulnerability. Activities include enabling
government policy for hunger and nutrition solutions, linking small
producers to markets and strengthening food security information
systems.
9.
The food assistance safety net approach of FFA, FFE and nutrition activities
on a district-wide basis in the most food-insecure areas is aimed to contribute to the
development of targeted communities affected by recurrent shocks and chronic
hunger. Priority will be given to strengthening programme linkages with local
government priorities, plans and budget processes, paving the way for a transition to
wholly government-owned safety net programmes. Complementary partnerships and
commitments from stakeholders will be important.
10. WFP integrates capacity development in its programme activities and will
work hand in hand with government counterparts and communities in the design,
implementation and monitoring of the activities, including training and peer -to-peer
learning between districts, especially for school fe eding. This capacity development
approach will facilitate the transition to government ownership and implementation
by local government authorities and allow WFP to gradually focus more on policy
and technical support.
11. Food for education — Component 1. Schoolchildren at 1,167 primary schools
(full day and boarding) will receive two cooked school meals a day during the 195
school days per year: a mid-morning porridge of fortified corn-soya blend (CSB)
and a school lunch consisting of cereals, pulses and vegetable oil. Based on food
security indicators combined with enrolment, attendance and drop out rates, FFE
will target Arusha, Dodoma, Manyara, Shinyanga and Singida regions. In addition,
WFP will support the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training (MoEVT) to
__________________
10

11

48

There are three priorities in the WFP Country Strategy: the first priority is emergency assistance
and assistance to refugees, addressed through emergency operations (EMOPS) and protracted
relief and recovery operations (PRROs); the second and third priorities are addressed through
this country programme.
Strategic Objective 2: Prevent acute hunger and invest in disaster preparedness and mitigation
measures; Strategic Objective 4: Reduce chronic hunger and undernutrition; and Strategic
Objective 5: Strengthen the capacities of countries to reduce hunger, including through handover strategies and local purchase.

10-66622

pilot the use of micronutrient powders to fortify the mid -day meal; if successful,
WFP will incorporate the process in all 1,167 schools under the FFE component.
12. WFP will work with communities and local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) to continue supporting the improvement of sanitation, hygiene and school
infrastructures, particularly fuel-efficient stoves and rainwater harvesting tanks. The
Government will implement a national deworming programme.
13. WFP will continue to support MoEVT in developing a national school feeding
strategy and guidelines to support implementation of school feeding. School
nutrition is now incorporated in the Ministry’s education and training policy. A
national policy is a critical step towards facilitating a sustainable national FFE
programme. Concurrent to policy support, WFP will continue to develop capacity at
central and district level to train education officials to manage school feeding
activities, and to support the existing Education Sector Managemen t Information
System (ESMIS) database.
14. Food for Assets — Component 2. 12 The evaluation of the previous WFP
country programme recommended a more focused and long-term strategy in its FFA
activities. Through a disaster risk reduction lens, FFA will streng then community
resilience, reduce vulnerability and enhance local food access and food availability
throughout the agricultural cycle for people who are unable to mitigate recurring
economic, climatic or seasonal shocks that cause ―poor‖ or ―borderline‖ consumption.13
Food will be an incentive to participate in asset-creation activities and participants
will receive take-home rations during the lean period when access to food is poor
and prices are high. A food basket of cereals, pulses and vegetable oil wi ll be
provided according to standardized work norms. Based on the rural daily labour
wage rate and average market prices, the daily ration for FFA activities is equivalent
to approximately 90 per cent of household expenditure on food. 14
15. To strengthen resilience and promote adaptation to climate variability, FFA
activities will include soil and water conservation measures (water harvesting
systems and soil fertility enhancement measures), basic community socio -economic
infrastructure, irrigation, homestead productivity intensification and income generating activities, and tree nursery development. Community targeting and local level participatory planning will ensure that the most vulnerable and food -insecure
households are given priority to participate in FFA activities and be direct
beneficiaries of the assets created or rehabilitated. A portion of the FFA food
(5-15 per cent) will be reserved for the most vulnerable households that are unable
to work because of age, disabilities, pregnancy, chronic illness, etc. These
beneficiaries will engage in less strenuous activities. WFP will draw on market and
feasibility studies to explore combinations of transfers for food, cash and vouchers.
16. The projects will be integrated into the district-level agricultural and
development plans. A lasting impact on community food security will be achieved
through the design of synergetic projects using the Local-Level Participatory
Planning and Implementation Approach (LLPPIA). In addition to developing
capacity of local entities, this approach will enhance the community project
__________________
12
13
14

The FFA activities will take place for a six-month period according to the agricultural calendar.
As measured by the food consumption score.
Alpha values for cereals 1.72 (local purchase) and 1.67 (regional purchase).

49

ownership. Programme success or the triggers to graduate from food assistance will
be based on community and household asset scores and food consumption data.
17. Nutrition Programmes — Components 3 and 4. The supplementary feeding
programme (SuFP) will aim to reduce levels of global acute malnutrition (GAM)
among children under 5 and pregnant and lactating women and will ensure
continuity of the current programme in districts with a GAM rate above the national
average, while gradually shifting to a new approach that addresses stunting. The
SuFP will provide CSB and vegetable oil to 12,000 children under 5 and pregnant
and lactating women with moderate acute malnutrition in health centres or posts in
the prioritized districts. 15
18. The mother-and-child health and nutrition (MCHN) programme will help
reduce stunting levels among children under 2. A ration of CSB will be given to all
pregnant and lactating women for six months before and after delivery as well as to
children 6-24 months who attend health centres. The MCHN programme will also
contribute to improving mother and child health by encouraging them to use health
and nutrition services. WFP, NGOs and other United Nations agencies will provide
technical assistance in community-based approaches to counselling and education
on nutrition and infant/young child feeding practices.
19. To address micronutrient deficiencies, WFP will continue to help accelerate
food fortification. Advocacy and technical support will be provided, in collaboration
with the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) and the World Bank, for safe and cost-effective food fortification
promoting the use of locally produced commodities. Research will focus on the
feasibility of, and support to, small/medium-scale processing and fortification,
especially in rural areas. As locally fortified foods become available, WFP will
explore means by which vouchers can be used in conjunction with food respons es to
support the development of markets for the MCHN programme.
20. Technical support to the Government will be provided for strengthening the
Nutrition Information Management System for programmatic planning. In
collaboration with the Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre (TFNC) and other
stakeholders, sentinel centres for nutrition monitoring will be established in various
locations.
21. HIV and AIDS — Component 5. Based on a review of WFP’s comparative
advantages and recommendations from the evaluation of the previous country
programme, WFP’s engagement in HIV and AIDS will shift to an integrated strategy
focusing on policy, nutrition advocacy and integrating support to people affected by
HIV and AIDS into WFP activities. The hand-over process started in the 2007-2011
country programme; in the 2011-2015 country programme, WFP will continue food
assistance to anti-retroviral therapy (ART) patients, most-vulnerable children
(MVC) 16 and families through cooperating partners for six months, while
supporting linkages with organizations specializing in HIV and AIDS that can
provide necessary food support. WFP will follow the progress of the beneficiaries
__________________
15

16

50

Entry criteria is weight-for-height less than -2 and greater than -3 z-score for children under 5;
mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) between 18.5 and 21 cm for pregnant women in the
second and third trimesters, and lactating women with a child under 6 months.
MVC includes orphans attending boarding vocational training centre under the food-for-training
(FFT) activity.

10-66622

for six months following exit from the programme and will address HIV and AIDS related vulnerabilities within its broader social and livelihood support programme,
as well as through health and nutrition services.
22. At the national level, WFP will advocate for strengthening the national HIV
policy, which places the Government at the centre of interventions that focus on food
assistance, with an emphasis on nutrition for people living with HIV (PLHIV).
Under the UNDAP, WFP will contribute to an inter-agency approach of
strengthening the TFNC and Tanzania Commission for AIDS (TACAIDS) to provide
technical support, and will ensure that future policy incorporates nutrition and food
security components for PLHIV.
23. Linking smallholder farmers to markets. Building on the current activities
under the Purchase for Progress (P4P) Initiative, WFP will continue to use its foo d
purchasing capacity to combat hunger and improve food security. In partnership
with United Nations agencies, NGOs, farmer groups and government ministries,
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, the African Development Bank, the
World Bank and others, the capacity of smallholder farmers will be reinforced to
raise farmer incomes through the direct sale of agricultural products to local or
regional markets. Credit facilities, improved storage capacities and post -harvest
handling, quality control, and the use of improved seeds and fertilizers will boost
the capacities for smallholder farmers to undertake market -oriented farming
activities. WFP will explore opportunities to further link farmer groups to local FFE
activities, integrate communities that have graduated from FFA to smallholder
procurement, and link with partners for small-scale agro-processing and food
fortification.
24. Strengthening food security and nutrition information systems. The 2010
CFSVA, which was implemented by the National Bureau of Statistics, with technical
oversight and analytical support from WFP and other government offices, will serve
as the benchmark for measuring improvements in household and community food
security. The Government also leads periodic rapid vulnerability as sessments at least
twice a year. While the Government demonstrates clear capacity to monitor the food
security situation at national level, district capacity for early warning and nutrition
monitoring remains weak. Consequently, further capacity developmen t through
training, investment in data collection and analysis, and joint assessments 17 are
required to ensure that WFP and the Government can respond to localized and
structural causes of hunger.

__________________
17

Including: Developing capacity of food security information teams and rapid vulnerability
assessments, strengthening early warning systems, geographical-risk mapping and disaster risk
reduction database for flood-prone areas.

51

TABLE 1: BENEFICIARIES BY COMPONENT (average per year)*
Men/boys

Women/girls

Total

Component 1 – FFE

352 114

366 486

718 600

Component 2 – FFA

122 500

127 500

250 000

Component 3 – SuFP

5 880

42 120

48 000

Component 4 – MCHN

34 839

69 261

104 100

Component 5 – HIV and
AIDS**

14 504

15 096

29 600

529 249

616 251

TOTAL AVERAGE/YEAR

1 145 500

* The cumulative number of people receiving food assistance during the country programme is 2,521,400. The
total average beneficiaries per year has taken into account the possible 10 per cent overlap of SuFP and
MCHN beneficiaries.
** For the HIV and AIDS programme the figure is for the first six months only (July -December 2010).

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
25. The Government at central, regional and district levels will guide all
interventions. WFP will use its expertise in capacity development and training to
enhance the ability of the Government and other partners to implement the
activities.
26. WFP expects to buy 54 per cent of the food requirements locally, and also to
procure for WFP projects implemented in neighbouring countries. WFP works with
large traders, but is also fostering relationships with smallholder farmer groups. To
reduce transport costs, purchases closer to the beneficiaries will be favoured. A cost
comparison with import parity will be applied for all local food procurement. Food
arriving by ship to Dar es Salaam will be transported by road to extended delivery
points in Arusha and Dodoma and to schools in districts or villages.
27. As a baseline for the activities, WFP will draw on the 2010 CFSVA, DHS and
two forthcoming baseline surveys for school feeding and productive safety nets that
include household socio-economic indicators. The monitoring plan will be linked to
the overall programme strategy and be implemented wit h the support of field
monitors based in sub-offices. WFP will reinforce its monitoring system to ensure
measurements of programme impact against the baseline data.
28. This country programme has benefited from the evaluation of the 2007 -2011
country programme conducted in 2010. A decentralized midterm evaluation will
focus on identifying any potential adjustments required in the implementation
strategy as well as assessing the overall performance — relevance, coherence,
efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability — of this country programme.
29. WFP will require a shift in the staff profile and skills so that they emphasize
programme management and capacity development, as well as advisory skills and
negotiation skills, in order to enable staff to engage with, and provide policy and
technical advice to, the Government. In the course of the country programme, WFP
will invest in training to develop staff in these areas.

52

10-66622

TABLE 2: DAILY FOOD RATIONS BY COMPONENT (g/person/day)
Food type
Cereals

Component 1 –
FFE*
120

Component 2 –
FFA
400

Component 3
– SuFP
-

Component 4
– MCHN
-

Component 5 –
HIV and AIDS**
MVC 300
ART 450

Pulses

30

70

-

MVC 50
ART 60

Vegetable oil

5

30

20

-

MVC 20
ART 25

CSB

40

Total

-

195

Total kcal/day

725

% Kcal from
protein

13.9

% Kcal from fat

15.6

Number of feeding
days per year

195

230

500

250

1 900

1 097

11.4

15.1

22.2

27.7

180

90

Woman 250

MVC 80

Child 210

ART 120

Woman 250

MVC 450

Child 210

ART 655

Woman 1 000

MVC 1 715

Child 840

ART 2 477

Woman 18.0

MVC 12.7

Child 13.5

ART 12.7

Woman 18.0

MVC 19.6

Child 13.5

ART 18.5

365

180

* WFP will pilot adding micro-nutrients to the midday meal.
** For HIV, each beneficiary will receive a family ration, based on an average of five people per family; under FFT, orphans
attending boarding vocational training centre will receive a mid-morning snack and a lunch at the centre.

TABLE 3: TOTAL FOOD REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT (2011–2015) (mt)
Food type

Component
1 – FFE

Component
2 – FFA

Cereals

67 220

72 000

-

-

Pulses

16 805

12 600

-

-

299

29 704

2 801

5 400

346

-

122

8 669

556

60 318

Vegetable oil
CSB

22 407

Total

109 233

90 000

45.5

37.5

% of total
requirements

Component
3 – SuFP

Component
4 – MCHN

Component
5 – HIV and
AIDS
2 084

Total

141 304

3 974

33 381

4 320

33 381

3 061

239 995

1.8

13.9

1.3

100

53

BUDGET SUMMARY FOR TANZANIA COUNTRY PROGRAMME 200200 (2011-2015) (US$)
Component 1

Food (mt)18

Component 2

Component 3

Component 4

Component 5

Total

109 233

90 000

4 320

33 381

3 061

239 995 mt

Food

43 575 053

32 557 728

2 419 684

17 506 920

1 147 408

97 206 792

Total by component

43 575 053

32 557 728

2 419 684

17 506 920

1 147 408

97 206 792

External transport
Landside transport storage
and handling (LTSH)(total)
LTSH (per mt)

6 412 017
35 106 469
146.28

Other direct operational costs
Total direct
operational costs

7 104 501
145 829 779

Direct support costs19

17 745 275

Indirect support costs20

11 450 254

Total WFP costs

175 025 307

__________________
18
19

20

54

This is a notional food basket for budgeting and approval. The contents may vary.
Indicative figure for information purposes. The direct support costs allotment is reviewed
annually.
The indirect support cost rate may be amended by the Board during the project.

10-66622

DIRECT SUPPORT REQUIREMENTS (US$)
Staff and staff-related costs
International professional staff

5 188 794

Local staff - national officers

1 738 321

Local staff - general service

3 663 560

Local staff - overtime

28 000

International consultants

1 535 000

Staff duty travel

2 283 000

Subtotal

14 436 675

Recurring expenses
Rental of facility

336 000

Utilities general

160 000

Office supplies and other consumables

160 000

Communications services

400 000

Equipment repair and maintenance
Vehicle running cost and maintenance
Office set-up and repairs
United Nations organization services
Subtotal

64 000
1 080 000
80 000
200 000
2 480 000

Equipment and capital costs
Vehicle leasing

285 600

Communications equipment

323 000

Local security costs

220 000

Subtotal
TOTAL DIRECT SUPPORT COSTS

828 600
17 745 275

55

56

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results

Performance indicators

UNDAP OUTCOMES21

UNDAP Outcome Indicators

MoEVT has a system in place for national school
feeding, prioritizing food insecure areas

Government implementation strategy and guidelines for
national school feeding in place

Relevant ministries, departments and agencies
(MDAs) undertake evidence-based planning,
management and quality assurance at national,
district, ward and school levels

Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient quantity
and quality to targeted women, men, girls and boys under
secure conditions

Local government authorities (LGAs), agriculture
support organizations and smallholder farmers
increase agricultural productivity, access to markets
and food security
Key MDAs and LGAs integrate climate change
adaptation and mitigation in their strategies and plans
Government coordinates a multisectoral social
protection response to the needs of economically
deprived and insecure groups
Relevant MDAs and LGAs integrate nutrition into
policies, plans and budgets and strengthen
institutional arrangements for delivery of services
Selected MDAs, LGAs and non-State actors deliver
increased quality of HIV and AIDS care and
treatment services

District-level management information system (MIS) for
basic education established and use of data, particularly
with regards to equity and quality related indicators,
increased
Better knowledge-sharing on agriculture productivity, food
fortification and marketing
Hazard risk reduced in targeted communities, including
climate change adaptation
Select LGAs incorporate climate change adaptation
programmes in their plans and budgets
Evidence base strengthened to inform social protection
programme design options targeted to priority groups
Priority regions and districts deliver essential nutrition
services effectively
National institutional arrangements prioritize nutrition in
policies, plans and budgets
Targeted anti-retroviral therapy (ART) patients have
improved nutrition status in the first six months of ART
MoHSW and LGAs have enhanced capacities to provide
quality HIV care and treatment services including
tuberculosis (TB)/HIV collaborative services and nutrition

__________________
21
The Tanzania UNDAP integrates WFP outcomes and indicators in its different sectors.

Risks, assumptions

Limited inter-ministry
linkages to support
agriculture and food
security and a mismatch
between national ministry
budgetary allocations and
government priorities

A lack of a conducive and
enabling environment for
the private sector, limiting
their full participation in the
agriculture and food
security sector

Climate change and climate
variability increase the
number or severity of
natural disasters, forcing the
Government to divert funds
from development to
emergency interventions

Resources
required

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results

Performance indicators

Risks, assumptions

Resources
required

Country programme component 1: Food for education
US$79,662,240

Strategic objective 4: Reduce chronic hunger and undernutrition
Outcome 1
Increased access to education and human capital
development in assisted schools

Output 1.1
Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient
quantity and quality to targeted women, men, girls
and boys under secure conditions

Enrolment: Average annual rate of change (Target: 3%);
Attendance rate (Target: 86%)
Drop out rates for girls and boys (Target: to be determined in
2010 school feeding baseline survey
Gender ratio: ratio of girls to boys enrolled (Target: 1)
Pass rate for girls and boys for grade VII (Target: 45%)

Communities and schools
are committed to fulfilling
their obligations related to
kitchens, water and fuel

Number of women, men, girls and boys receiving food and
non-food items, by category and as % of planned figures
(Target: see beneficiary table)
Quantity of food and non-food items distributed, by type, and
as % of planned distribution
(Target: see food requirements table)

Strategic objective 5: Strengthen the capacities of countries to reduce hunger, including through hand-over strategies and local purchase
Outcome 2
MoEVT has a system in place for national school
feeding, prioritizing food-insecure areas
Output 2.1
Government implementation strategy and guidelines
for national school feeding in place
Output 2.2
District-level MIS for basic education established
and use of data, particularly with regards to equity
and quality related indicators, increased

Approved system in place for national school feeding
programme (Target: national system functions)

National commitment to
implementation of school
feeding

Strategy and guidelines with clear roles and responsibilities
at national, district and ward level
(Target: School feeding guidelines and implementation
strategy operational at national, district and ward level)
Share of districts with school feeding activities that have
functioning ESMIS database
(Target: 100%)

Stakeholders collaborate in
ESMIS development

57

58

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results

Performance indicators

Risks, assumptions

Resources
required

Country Programme Component 2: Food for assets
US$65,635,858

Strategic objective 2: Prevent acute hunger and invest in disaster preparedness and mitigation measures
Outcome 3
Adequate food consumption over assistance period
for targeted households at risk of falling into acute
hunger
Output 3.1
Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient
quantity and quality to targeted women, men, girls
and boys under secure conditions

Outcome 4
Hazard risk reduced at community level in targeted
communities

Output 4.1
Built or restored disaster mitigation assets by targeted
communities

Household food consumption score: percentage of targeted
households with food consumption score >35
(Target: 80%)

No major emergencies that
impact livelihoods or health
status of targeted population

Number of women, men, girls and boys receiving food and
non-food items, by category and as % of planned figures
(Target: see beneficiary table)
Quantity of food and non-food items distributed, by type,
and as % of planned distribution
(Target: see food requirements table)
Community asset score: percentage of targeted
communities with an asset score over set threshold (Target:
to be determined by project baseline); Household asset
score: % of targeted households with an asset score over set
threshold
(Target: to be determined by project baseline)

Effective and reliable
marketing systems for food
and non-food items

Number of assets constructed/rehabilitated
(Target: to be determined on the basis of implementation
plan)

Non-food items and access
to extension services
ensured

Strategic objective 5: Strengthen the capacities of countries to reduce hunger, including through hand-over strategies and local purchase
Outcome 5
Broader policy frameworks incorporate hunger
solutions
Output 5.1
Select LGAs incorporate climate change
adaptation/disaster risk reduction programmes in their
plans and budgets

Percentage increase in Government’s funding for hunger
solution tools in national plans of action
(Target: 20%)
Share of WFP-initiated FFA projects incorporated into
district development and budget plans
(Target: 100%)

Progress made on local
level influences national
policymaking

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results
Output 5.2
Evidence base strengthened to inform social
protection programme design options targeted to
priority groups

Performance indicators

Risks, assumptions

Resources
required

Lessons learned on different transfer mechanisms inform
social protection policy choices
(Target: lessons learned documented and distributed)

Country programme component 3: Supplementary feeding programme
US$3,150,521

Strategic Objective 4: Reduce chronic hunger and undernutrition
Outcome 6
Improved nutritional status of targeted women, girls
and boys
Output 6.1
Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient
quantity and quality to targeted women, men, girls
and boys under secure conditions

Supplementary feeding recovery rate (Target: > 75%)/
defaulter rate (Target: < 15%)
Average length of enrolment in supplementary feeding
(Target: < 60 days)
Number of women, girls and boys receiving food and
non-food items, by category and as % of planned figures
(Target: see beneficiary table)
Quantity of food distributed, by type, and as % of planned
distribution
(Target: see food requirements table)

District health management
teams fulfil its role
supporting SuFP

Country programme component 4: Mother-and-child health and nutrition
US$24,344,340

Strategic objective 4: Reduce chronic hunger and undernutrition
Outcome 7
Improved nutritional status of targeted women, girls
and boys

Output 7.1
Pregnant and lactating women counselled on proper
childcare and feeding practices

Prevalence of stunting among targeted children under 2
(Target: 10% reduction/year)
Prevalence of targeted women practicing exclusive
breastfeeding and correct introduction of complementary
foods (Target: to be determined)
Percentage of children aged 24 months who completed all
vaccinations according to the schedule in the national
protocol
(Target: to be determined)
Percentage of supported pregnant and lactating women who
received antenatal/post-natal check-ups
(Target: to be determined)

Health personnel are
motivated and have time to
provide adequate
counselling sessions

59

60

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results
Output 7.2
Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient
quantity and quality to targeted women, girls and
boys under secure conditions

Performance indicators

Risks, assumptions

Number of women, girls and boys receiving food and nonfood items, by category and as % of planned figures
(Target: see beneficiary table)
Tonnage of food distributed, by type, and as % of planned
distribution (Target: see food requirements table)

District health management
teams fulfil its role
supporting MCHN
programme

Strategic objective 5: Strengthen the capacities of countries to reduce hunger, including through hand-over strategies and local purchase
Outcome 8
Better knowledge-sharing on agriculture productivity,
food fortification and marketing.

National protocol for fortification of foods adopted

Adequate coordination of
producers of fortified foods

Number of best mechanisms for food fortification
identified;
Output 8.1
Capacity and awareness for food fortification
developed through WFP-organized actions/training

Number of small scale farmers trained on food
fortification;
Quantity of equipment and communication materials
provided

Outcome 9
National institutional arrangements prioritize nutrition
in policies, plans and budgets
Output 9.1
Capacity for nutrition-sensitive design, planning and
budgeting is developed
Outcome 10
Priority regions and districts deliver essential nutrition
services effectively

Percentage increase in Government’s funding for hunger
solution tools in national plans of action

Number of districts planning and budgeting for MCHN
activities

Number of targeted communities with health facilities with
sufficient staff to provide agreed services

Output 10.1
Capacity and awareness for MCHN developed
through WFP-organized actions/training

Progress made on local
level influences national
policymaking

National protocol for MCHN adopted

Sufficient human capital to
fill positions at all levels

Resources
required

WFP LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Results

Performance indicators

Risks, assumptions

Resources
required

Country Programme Component 5: HIV and AIDS
Strategic objective 4: Reduce chronic hunger and undernutrition
Outcome 10
Increased survival of adults and children with HIV
after 6 and 12 months of anti-retroviral therapy
(ART)
Outcome 11
Targeted ART clients have improved nutritional
status in the first six months of ART
Output 11.1
Food and non-food items distributed in sufficient
quantity and quality to targeted women, men, girls
and boys under secure conditions

ART survival rate: % of adults and children with HIV
known to be on treatment 6 and 12 months after initiation
of ART
(Target: to be determined)
Prevalence of malnutrition among WFP-assisted ART
patients in clinics (Target: to be determined)
Number of women, men, girls and boys receiving food and
non-food items, by category and as % of planned figures
(Target: see beneficiary table)
Quantity of food distributed, by type, and as % of planned
distribution (Target: see food requirements table)

Strategic objective 5: Strengthen the capacities of countries to reduce hunger, including through hand-over strategies and local purchase
Outcome 12
MoHSW and LGAs have enhanced capacities to
provide quality HIV care and treatment services
including TB/HIV collaborative services and nutrition
Output 12.1
Agreed hand-over and mainstreaming strategies in
place

Food assistance and nutrition components are incorporated
in national HIV policy document and implemented

Number of hand-over and mainstreaming strategies agreed
to between WFP and partners

US$ 2,232,348

61

