Thailand
Country programme document
2012-2016

The draft country programme document for Thailand
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.45) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

†

Basic data
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight

(%, moderate and severe, 2005-2006)
(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported 2005)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)
Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

17.9
14
7
5/8, 11/3
12 a
91/89
99
100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

89

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2009)

1.3

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old, 2006)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2005-2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

8
99
100/99, 100/99, 99/100
3 760

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

99

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

98

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
48 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html/.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Thailand is on track to achieve most of the Millennium Development Goals by
2015. The percentage of the population living in poverty dropped from 38 per cent
in 1990 to 8.5 per cent in 2007, and the proportion of underweight children fell by
half between 1993 and 2006. Most children are in school and it is possible to
achieve universal primary school enrolment by mid-decade. The annual number of
new HIV infections has fallen by 90 per cent since 1991. Thailand acceded to both
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child in early 2006.
2.
However, not all children have benefited from the progress equally. There
remains persistent and structural inequality and pockets of severe poverty. Children
are also disproportionately represented among the poor. About 1 in 8 children live in
poverty compared to 1 in 12 adults, and it is estimated that some 2 million children
live below the poverty line. Children in poor households are most concentrated in
rural areas of the north and north-eastern provinces. Sixteen per cent of the poorest
children are chronically malnourished while the r ates of childhood obesity are
increasing in all income groups. There is also a very high level of vulnerability for
ethnic minorities, migrants, displaced persons, the unregistered and some 5 million
people living in poverty.

2

3.
While the proportion of children enrolling in basic education has increased,
with a current primary net enrolment rate of 90 per cent, around 600,000 girls and
boys still do not enrol in primary school or enrol late. 1 There is also substantial
room for improvement in the quality of education.
4.
The transformation of traditional family structures has led to new social
problems, including drug abuse, violence, suicide, homelessness and sexual and
economic exploitation. More than 1 million children are estimated to be in need of
special protection; they include orphans, children with disabilities, children who live
or work on the street, child labourers and an estimated 450,000 children affected by
HIV/AIDS. Teenage pregnancy and abortion is also an emerging issue. While
HIV/AIDS transmission is generally under control except among the most at -risk
population groups, stigma and discrimination against people living with HIV/AIDS
continues.
5.
On most health- and education-related indicators, there is little gender disparity
between boys and girls. However, other forms of gender discrimination exist. There
are different expectations for boys and girls in terms of their behaviour, roles and
responsibilities. Gender discrimination is most evident in the rights of women and
girls to protection and participation. Girls account for 87 per cent of victims referred
to the Government’s one-stop crisis centres set up to address cases of domestic
violence. Also, there are very few women leaders in the political system.
6.
Socio-economic pressure has led to large-scale internal migration with young
people moving to urban areas for work, leaving their children behind to be brought
up by grandparents or other caregivers. In the 0 -17 age group, 25 per cent of
children of the poorest and 24 per cent of the second poorest households were not
living with their biological parents as of 2006, with yet unknown social
consequences. Thailand’s economy has also been relying increasingly on large -scale
cross-border migration, especially from neighbouring countries due to the very rapid
population and demographic changes the country has been going through, and the
substantially higher level of socio-economic development in Thailand compared to
its poor neighbours. Most of the estimated 2.5 million migra nts, many of them in
Thailand unofficially, are among the poorest in the country.
7.
Thailand experiences an annual cycle of emergencies, including floods,
droughts and forest fires, which disproportionately affect the poor. At the same time,
the country has built good capacities to respond to most forms of man -made or
natural disasters.
8.
Under-implementation of national policies and plans is a major constraint to
fulfilling the rights of disadvantaged children and women. Although a substantial
body of child protection legislation has been adopted, it has not been matched by the
allocation of adequate resources to ensure full implementation. There are a set of
underlying barriers to effective social action for further realization of child rights,
such as prevailing social values and attitudes, institutional inertia and resultant low
prioritization. In its 2006 review of Thailand’s Second Report on the
Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Committee on the
Rights of the Child commended the country’s progress on children’s rights but, at
the same time, highlighted the need to do more to ensure the rights of the most
__________________
1

Education for All Global Monitoring Report, UNESCO, 2011.

3

vulnerable. The Committee also provided extensive recommendations for further
strengthening of child protection systems.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
9.
UNICEF advocacy as well as technical and financial support have contributed
to the development of policies, systems and legislation that provide a more
protective and enabling environment for children. A series of actions related to birth
registration and nationality were taken, including amendment of the Nationality Law
and Civil Registration Law; successful piloting of a new national birth registration
system; and eventual lifting of Thailand’s reservation on Article 7 (on birth
registration and right to a nationality) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
in 2011. These initiatives will benefit some 50,000 children currently not registered
at birth annually and will contribute to ensuring universal birth registration and
prevention of statelessness. Another example is enactment of legislation in 2010,
mandating iodization of salt produced for human consumption. With proper
implementation, this will benefit several million children by protecting them from
iodine deficiency disorders. Other examples include an increase in the age of criminal
responsibility and adoption of national early childhood development standards.
10. UNICEF contributed to a heightened awareness of children’s rights through
extensive support for child rights awareness training for some 30,000 government
officials, teachers, police, justice workers, young people and journalists. UNICEF
financial and technical support for the “Visioning for Children 2027” exercise
helped formulate a long-term vision for the country’s children. This nationwide
exercise solicited views and opinions of some 20,000 people in all provinces,
including children and young people, on challenges for child rights and their vision
for the country’s children. It created further awareness on child r ights and ensured
that children’s issues are considered in the country’s national development planning.
Support was also provided for generating awareness, and capacity building of the
media as a key ally for advocacy on child rights, through an annual Chi ld-Friendly
Media Award; journalists’ training on ethical reporting on children; and
incorporation of child rights-related issues into the curriculum of the Department of
Journalism of a prominent university.
11. Advocacy as well as technical and financial support by UNICEF resulted in
approval of Thailand’s application to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria for a $42 million grant for children affected by AIDS and for other
vulnerable children. This will benefit 113,000 children over t he next five years.
Funds raised through private-sector fundraising increased from $3.2 million in 2007
to over $9 million in 2010 and cover over 70 per cent of the country programme’s
other resources needs. Private-sector local fundraising also brought more than
80,000 individuals as regular supporters to promote the well -being of children.
12. UNICEF support to studies, surveys and evaluations led to improved
understanding of the situation of children. UNICEF provided financial and technical
support to the National Statistics Office to conduct a multiple indicator cluster
survey in 2006 for collection of key data related to children and women. Its results
were widely disseminated and utilized for advocacy, policy discussion and policy

4

development, particularly on those issues on which progress has been slow and/or
there have been substantial disparities in achievement. Another multiple indicator
cluster survey will be conducted in 2011 to assess the progress made since then.
Between 2007 and 2008, a study entitled “Everyday Fears” was conducted in
collaboration with non-governmental organizations (NGO) partners, interviewing
some 2,300 children living in violence-affected southern border provinces. The
study contributed to deeper understanding of children’s perceptions of violence and
its effect on their lives and communities.
13. Through UNICEF technical and financial support, Thailand shared its best
experiences in programming for children with other countries. More than 600
professionals from 24 countries participated in more than 40 training courses and
study visits. This led to increased international and regional partnerships for
children and application of Thailand’s lessons learned in other countries.
Lessons learned
14. Reflecting Thailand’s status as a middle-income country, there has been strong
emphasis on more “upstream” programming for UNICEF cooperation in Thailand,
with greater emphasis on evidence-based programming, advocacy, policy
development and legislative reforms. At the same time, the 2009 midterm review
(MTR) and the 2010 Strategic Moment of Reflection (SMR) concluded that these
strategies need to be more consistently applied across all the programme components.
There is need for support to overcome challenges in translating polic ies, legislation
and programmes into effective actions, including budget-related work and overall
social investment in children. Advocacy efforts need to be strengthened through more
systematic planning, greater use of communication for development and str onger
involvement of media and other potential allies, such as private sector entities.
15. The 2009 MTR also assessed overall efforts for piloting and evaluation in the
first half of the programming cycle and identified their weaknesses. Piloting was
often not rigorous enough in design, implementation and evaluation. There was also
room for improvement in the quality of evaluations, and their results were not
always used strategically. Efforts to address these issues will be continued into the
next country programme period. Greater emphasis will be given to developing
national capacities for generating and using disaggregated data to detect inequalities
and ascertain informed decision-making.
16. The 2010 SMR concluded that there needs to be a more systematic and
strategic approach to building national capacities to ensure greater and more
sustainable impact for children. This may include greater use of technical assistance
through institution-based arrangements (as compared to stand-alone consultancies)
and international collaboration, including South-South exchanges to derive the
maximum benefit from global best practices.

5

The country programme, 2012-2016
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Social policy analysis, budget, evidence and
monitoring

1 272

7 800

9 072

Promoting equity, social inclusion and protection

2 741

25 400

28 141

—

32 100

32 100

152

1 250

1 402

4 165

66 550

70 715

Advocacy, social action and resources mobilization
Cross-sectoral support
Total

Preparation process
17. Country programme preparation was based on: (a) an updated situation
analysis, conducted in 2010; (b) a national institutional capacities assessment in
2010 that sought to identify critical strengths and gaps in Thailand’s capacities to
realize the rights of all children; (c) the 2009 MTR; (d) the 2010 SMR; (e) the
outcomes of the national “Visioning for Children 2027” exercise with involvement
of children and youth; and (f) the United Nations Partnership F ramework (UNPAF)
for 2012-2016 — an agreement of cooperation between the Government and the
19 resident United Nations agencies. The UNPAF is the equivalent of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Thailand. The UNPAF took into
consideration national priorities as identified in Thailand’s draft Eleventh National
Economic and Social Development Plan.
Programme and component results and strategies
18. The country programme will support Thailand in the progressive realization of
the rights of girls and boys, reducing inequities and vulnerabilities while moving
towards achievement of key Millennium Development Goals and the country’s
Millennium Development Goals-Plus targets. The programme also contributes to
strengthening national systems for monitoring and oversight of the situation of
children and women and for advocacy for promotion and protection of their rights.
Specific programme results are detailed under each programme component below.
19. The country programme will be based on the principles of a human rights based approach to programming, gender equity and mainstreaming, and environmental
sustainability. The main strategies to achieve results for children and women are
more “upstream” in nature than previous cooperation: (a) evidence-based advocacy
for child-friendly policies and action, especially for the most disadvantaged children;
(b) leveraging national resources, including public social spending for children and
women; (c) helping strengthen capacities of the key national institutions for
monitoring the situation of children and women, law and policy development,
standards-setting and implementation of policies and programmes; (d) partnerships
and alliances with the Government, the United Nations country team, civil society,
media, academics, private-sector entities and local donors; (e) increasing the
participation of children, young people, women, families and communities;

6

(f) improved access to information and communication for development;
(g) international collaboration, including South-South cooperation to facilitate twoway exchange of expertise, experiences and best practices between Thailand and
other countries; and (h) knowledge management on child -related issues and actions.
20. Special emphasis will be placed on the importance of data and evidence.
Piloting and evaluation of new and innovative approaches will be strengthened to
provide a solid basis for what to advocate. Coordination among different programme
components will be strengthened to realize synergies in generating evidence and
form the basis for policy dialogue, communication for development, advocacy and
capacity development.
21. Disaster risk reduction and response will be mainstreamed into all components
of the programme and coordinated with the efforts of other actors through the
inter-agency coordination mechanism.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNPAF
22. The country programme of cooperation supports the goals set in the 2012 -2016
Eleventh National Economic and Social Development Plan, particularly two of its
main priority areas: promoting a just society; and building human resources to
promote a life-long learning society. It will also support Thailand’s Millennium
Development Goals-Plus and other relevant national plans.
23. The UNPAF guided preparation of the proposed country programme, which is
closely linked to the following UNPAF outcomes: (a) social reform for equity and
empowerment, which encompasses social protection, strategic i nformation, human
rights and access to justice; (b) global partnerships, including increased South -South
cooperation; and (c) climate change mitigation (child -related components).
Relationship to international priorities
24. The country programme supports the Millennium Declaration, the Millennium
Development Goals as well as the principles and goals of A World Fit for Children.
The programme is consistent with the priorities of the 2006 to 2013 Medium -Term
Strategic Plan of UNICEF. The emphasis on reducing disparities and reaching the
most marginalized children responds to the recommendations of the Committee on
the Rights of the Child and reflects a rights-based approach to programming and the
organization’s focus on equity.
Programme components
25. Social policy analysis, budget, evidence and monitoring. This programme
component will help to strengthen national capacities for social policy and budget
analysis, research and monitoring for better policy advocacy and informed decision making. It will also provide support to the other two programme components to
ensure the evidence base. Special focus will be placed on the most disadvantaged
children and on identifying and highlighting disparities in progress towards
realization of their rights. The programme will support: (a) monitoring of budget
and expenditures for children at the national and subnational levels and assessment
of their impact; (b) the National Statistical Office and other concerned actors to
generate and disseminate high quality and disaggregated data on the situation of
children and women and promote its analysis and use; (c) the National Economic

7

and Social Development Board and other relevant bodies in formulating social
protection policies and measures for children and ensuring responsiveness to the
situation of vulnerable children and women in national socio -economic planning;
(d) the Ministry of Social Development and Human Security in developing policies
that promote and protect children’s rights and in monitoring implementat ion; (e) the
concerned government and civil society organizations in conducting quality studies
and surveys on major issues concerning children, including early childhood
development, social protection, children with disabilities, violence against children
and women, teenage pregnancy, migration, climate change and other priority issues;
and (f) systematic measurement of progress towards the achievement of the country
programme results through application of the 2012 -2016 Integrated Monitoring,
Evaluation and Research Plan.
26. Expected results to be achieved by 2016 are: (a) major social and economic
policies are analysed and their impact on children is communicated to policy makers
and the public for informed decision-making; (b) the situation of children and
women, especially of children with multiple deprivations, is systematically
monitored and analysed; (c) research is conducted on major priority issues affecting
children and women for dissemination and advocacy; and (d) capacities of the
critical institutions are strengthened for national policy development, planning,
monitoring and evaluation related to children and women.
27. The main partners will be the Ministry of Social Development and Human
Security, the National Economic and Social Development Board, the National
Statistics Office and other selected line ministries, academic institutions and civil
society organizations. In planning and implementation of this programme, close
cooperation is envisaged particularly with the United Nations Populati on Fund
(UNFPA) and the International Labour Organization (ILO) through the joint
partnership and team approach in “strategic information” and “social protection”
result areas under the UNPAF.
28. Equity, social inclusion and protection. This component will contribute to
strengthening national systems for accelerated disparity reduction and increased
protection of children from violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect. Special
attention will be given to the rights of children in the poorest families, thos e living
in remote areas and in the southern border provinces, children with disabilities,
orphans and other children with multiple deprivations. Children concerned will
include non-Thai children living in Thailand. The main issue areas are: (a) birth
registration; (b) access to quality early childhood care and development services;
(c) access to primary and lower secondary education and improving their quality;
(d) development of a holistic child protection system to prevent and respond to all
forms of violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect through development of related
laws, policies, regulations and services in a coordinated and holistic manner; and
(e) access to essential child health and HIV/AIDS services.
29. Expected results to be achieved by 2016 are: (a) a new national birth
registration system adopted and implemented for universal birth registration;
(b) quality early childcare and development services provided to all children;
(c) enrolment of all children in primary school by age seven; (d ) development and
implementation of policies and strategies for substantial improvement in the quality
of education developed; (e) access to essential health, social services and
information by children affected by HIV/AIDS and other vulnerable children li ving

8

in HIV high-prevalence communities; and (f) formulation, adoption and progressive
implementation of a holistic national child protection system.
30. The main partners will be the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Social
Development and Human Security, Ministry of Public Health, the Ministry of the
Interior and the Ministry of Justice. UNICEF will also work closely with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in education;
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration for protection of refugee, displaced and migrant children;
members of the United Nations HIV/AIDS Theme Group and organizations involved
in the implementation of the Global Fund Round 10 proposa l for children affected
by AIDS; and academic institutions and NGOs for related research and piloting.
31. Advocacy, social action and resource mobilization. This component will
contribute to heightened importance of children in national awareness and on the
policy agenda, including the existence of substantial inequities in their situation and
call for national action to narrow the gaps. It will achieve this objective by:
(a) deploying a mix of advocacy and social mobilization strategies, such as
systematic work with mass media and communication for development; and
(b) formation of strategic partnerships and alliances with the Government, media,
private sector entities and civil society organizations.
32. A mutually reinforcing relationship is envisaged among the three programme
components. This programme will provide strategic communication support for
achievement of the results under the other two programme s. In addition, this
programme will further strengthen local fundraising for the country programme’s
budget in other resources as well as for global regular resources, in line with
Thailand’s status as a middle-income country. The communication efforts for local
fundraising will be used as an opportunity to enhance understanding and support for
realization of child rights both in Thailand and globally.
33. Expected results to be achieved by 2016 are: (a) increased awareness of public
and decision-makers of inequities in realization of children’s rights; (b) more positive
social norms and practices for child rights; (c) reduced tolerance to violence, neglect
and abuse of children; (d) reduced stigma and discrimination against disadvantaged
children; (e) promotion of good parenting outcomes; (f) adoption and implementation
of child-friendly business practices by corporate-sector networks and associations;
and (g) realization of children’s rights through financial contributions by individuals
and others to programmes for children.
34. The main partners will be the Government, media, private sector entities, civil
society organizations and individuals contributing to programmes for children.
35. Cross-sectoral support costs. These will cover implementation costs not
attributable to individual programme components, including cross -sectoral
programme monitoring and contributions to the resources necessary for coordination
within the United Nations Country Team.
Major partnerships
36. The main partnerships are described above. The expected results for the
proposed country programme are consciously set at higher and more strategic levels
with a view to facilitating an integrated approach, reducing transactional costs and
aligning more closely with the major priorities of the Eleventh National Economic

9

and Social Development Plan. This is expected to enhance quality dialogue with the
concerned national partners, strengthen their sense of ownership of the country
programme, and promote cross-sectoral coordination and cooperation among them.
The new UNPAF, which is more focused with clearer prioritization, is also expected
to help realize strategic and results-oriented coordination among the concerned
agencies, including UNICEF.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
37. The main coordinating national body for the implementation of the country
programme will be the Thailand International Development Cooperation Agency of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Programme components will be managed with the
relevant ministries and agencies: the Ministry of Social Development and Human
Security (oversight and monitoring of the situation of children and women and child
protection); the Ministry of Education; the Ministry of Public Health and the
national HIV/AIDS Management Committee; the National Economic and Social
Development Board; and the National Statistical Office. UNICEF contribution to the
well-being of children in the southern border provinces of the country will be made
in close coordination with relevant national partners.
38. Monitoring of the overall progress for children and women, including those
who are most disadvantaged, will be conducted through collection and analysis of
data on their situation through planned national surveys, subject-specific studies and
surveys, and regular statistics from the Government and non -governmental sources.
Progress towards planned results of the country programme and the contribution of
UNICEF to it will be measured through annual reviews, midterm review and
specific programme performance assessments, as well as through the UNPAF
monitoring process. The role of evaluations and the evaluation function will be
strengthened by prioritizing evaluations of higher quality and of a strateg ic nature.
Efforts will continue to strengthen national evaluation capacities, including support
to the national evaluation network.
39. The Integrated Monitoring, Evaluation and Research Plan will be fully applied
as a tool to strengthen monitoring and evaluation activities. Special attention will be
given to ensuring availability of disaggregated data for more detailed analysis and
understanding of progress on equity-related dimensions, including gender. The
situation analysis of children and young people will be updated in 2014 with a view
to providing inputs to the international Millennium Development Goals reporting in
2015. A 2014 midterm review of the programme in conjunction with a review of the
UNPAF will take stock of the progress made and the lessons learned in the first half
of the country programme period and need for adjustments until 2016.

10

