Timor-Leste
Country programme document
2015-2019

The draft country programme document for Timor-Leste
(E/ICEF/2014/P/L.3) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2014 annual session (3-6 June
2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data †
(2012 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, under 5 years, moderate and severe, 2009-2010)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

0.3/0.3
57
45
46/44, 35/47, 49/35
300 a

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2011)

69

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2011)

39

One year olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

67

One year olds immunized against measles (%)

62

Primary school enrolment (%, net male/female, 2011)

92/91

Survival rate to Grade 5 (%, male/female, 2010)

82/85

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 15-49 years, male/female)

..

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%)

..

Child labour (%, 5-14 years, male/female, 2002)

4/4

Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2009-2010)

55

(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

55/56, 50.57, 50/56
3,670

More comprehensive country data on children and women as well as detailed
methodological notes on estimates can be found at www.childinfo.org.
The figure reported in the above table is the adjusted MMR estimate prepared by the
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group (MMEIG). The reported MMR estimate
at the country level is 557 deaths per 100,000 live births (2009 -2010), as presented in the
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 2009-2010.

The situation of children and women
1.
Timor-Leste is a young country with nearly half (48 per cent) of its estimated
1.1 million population below 18 years of age. 1 Societal preference for many children,
low rates of contraception prevalence and a high total fertility rate of 5.7 per woman
have seen the population growing rapidly since independence was restored in 2002. 2
About 70 per cent of the population live in rural areas.
2.
The country has experienced social and political stability since 2008. Following
successful presidential and parliamentary elections and the smooth swearing-in of the
fifth Constitutional Government in August 2012, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste closed in December 2012.
3.
Guided by the National Strategic Development Plan 2011 -2030, the fifth
Constitutional Government launched a five-year development programme
(2012-2017), which reflects the shift in national focus from security issues to long term sustainable development. Timor-Leste leads the Group of Seven Plus (g7+) of
fragile and conflict-affected countries, and the implementation of A New Deal for
__________________
1
2

2/12

Timor-Leste 2010 National Census.
Timor-Leste Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2009-2010.

Engagement in Fragile States, Timor-Leste is in the process of joining the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
4.
Timor-Leste is classified as a lower-middle income country. Its economy and
budget are largely dependent on the exploitation of gas and oil fields. About
$15 billion in assets are maintained in the Petroleum Fund (as of January 2014), a
sovereign wealth fund where the surplus wealth produced by Timor-Leste petroleum
and gas income is deposited. However, about 41 per cent of the population are
estimated to live below the national poverty line of $0.88 per person per day. 3
5.
Timor-Leste is subject to frequent natural disasters, including flooding and
landslides (caused by heavy rains) and drought. With poor infrastructure and
insufficient disaster preparedness and response capacity, even small events can have
a major impact on the lives of people, particularly children, in food security, access
to safe drinking water and sanitation facilities and sc hool attendance.
6.
In the area of child health, Timor-Leste is on track to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 4, reducing the under-five mortality rate (U5MR) by one third.
Timor-Leste’s U5MR declined, from 83 per 1,000 live births in 2004 to 64 per 1,00 0
live births in 2010. Its infant mortality rate (IMR) declined from 60 per 1,000 live
births to 44 per 1,000 live births during the same period. Nonetheless, these figures
remain higher than the South-East Asia regional averages. There has not been a
reduction in the newborn mortality rate, which currently stands at 22 per 1,000 live
births. 4
7.
The maternal mortality ratio is estimated at 300 deaths per 100,000 live births;
Timor-Leste is off track for its Millennium Development Goal 5 targets. Despite a
significant increase in antenatal care (for one visit) by skilled staff (from 55 per cent
in 2007 to 86 per cent in 2009-2010), the quality of service is a concern. Only 30 per
cent of children were delivered by a skilled birth attendant and 78 per cent we re born
at home. Inequitable access to and utilization of quality maternal health services is a
challenge.
8.
Malnutrition is a major concern for Timor-Leste, with a childhood stunting rate
at 52 per cent in 2013 (Preliminary Findings of Timor-Leste Food and Nutrition
Survey 2013), a very high rate, despite dropping from 58 per cent in 2010. An
estimated 18.6 per cent have either moderate or severe acute wasting and 44.7 per
cent of children under five years are underweight. Timor-Leste is off track from
reaching Millennium Development Goal 1. Initiation of breastfeeding of children is
almost universal. However, despite a significant increase in the exclusive
breastfeeding rate over the past 10 years, still only 52 per cent of children up to six
months are exclusively breastfed and only 30 per cent of children 6 -23 months of age
receive the recommended complementary feeding. 5 Key bottlenecks are the limited
access to and utilization of preventive and promotive health and nutrition services,
high prevalence of childhood illnesses (especially pneumonia and diarrhoea), some
traditional care and feeding practices as well as inadequate systems and capacity for
addressing malnutrition.
__________________
3

4
5

World Bank, A 2009 Update of Poverty Incidence in Timor-Leste using the Survey-to-Survey
Imputation Method.
Most health-related data in this section is drawn from the DHS 2009-2010.
Composite indicator: fed breast milk or milk products; fed 3+ or 4+ food groups (diversity); fed
minimum times or more (frequency).

3/12

9.
Around 69 per cent of the population uses improved drinking water sources, an d
Timor-Leste is on track to achieving the target on safe drinking water. However, only
27 per cent of the rural population have improved toilet facilities and 37 per cent
practice open defecation. Poor hygiene practices contribute significantly to the lev el
of malnutrition in Timor-Leste. The public awareness on sanitation and public demand
for sanitation facilities are relatively low. The 2010 HIV sentinel surveillance showed
that the overall national HIV prevalence ratio is 0.68 per cent (extrapolated fr om
antenatal population). 6 Prevalence among the most-at-risk population is over 1 per
cent, with some districts showing prevalence up to 3.6 per cent. The 2013 programme
review of the national response to sexually transmitted infections (STI) and HIV
concluded that the HIV epidemic may be evolving from “low level” towards higher
HIV prevalence in some population pockets. The review also reported a high level of
population vulnerability resulting from high levels of population movement and
social-economic displacement, underemployment, low awareness of HIV and STI and
risk behaviours within at-risk groups as well as communities.
10. In education, substantial gains have been achieved in the net primary enrolment
rate, from 64.4 per cent in 2005 to 93.5 per cent in 2010. Timor-Leste is on track to
achieve the primary enrolment and gender equality targets. However, universal basic
education completion and learning outcomes remain as key challenges due to high
repetition and dropout, especially in early grades. I nadequate teaching and learning,
teachers’ lack of proficiency in the languages of instruction (Portuguese and Tetum),
non-availability of bilingual textbooks, limited contact time between teacher and
pupil, distances to school and environmental issues, including lack of water and
sanitation facilities, are major barriers to quality education for all. Pre -school
education has very limited coverage as only approximately 8 per cent of children aged
3-5 years were attending pre-school, with significant urban-rural disparities. 7 The gap
in access to pre-school education is another major cause of high repetition and poor
learning outcomes.
11. In the area of disability, 4.6 per cent of the Timor-Leste population reports
experiencing some form of disability. 8 The estimated proportion of children with
disabilities is even lower, at 0.86 per cent in the 0 -14 year age group. However, these
figures may be underestimates. Opportunities and skills for early detection of child
disability are extremely limited and develop ment opportunities for children with
disabilities even less.
12. Birth registration among children under five was 53.6 per cent in 2010 (Census).
It increased to an estimated 85 per cent following a nationwide campaign carried out
in February 2011. Efforts are being made to facilitate birth registration by involving
community leaders and establishing birth registration posts in referral hospitals and
community health centres.
13. Data on the prevalence of abuse, neglect, exploitation and violence against
children and women in Timor-Leste are limited. Domestic violence is commonly
acknowledged as a serious issue in Timor-Leste. Among women aged 15-19 years, 38

__________________
6

7
8

4/12

P. Chan, F. Mawanda, R. Vannakit and G. Weerasinghe, Timor-Leste Health Sector Response to
HIV/AIDS and STI Programme, (2013).
Ministry of Education, National Education Strategic Plan, 2011-2030.
Timor-Leste 2010 National Census.

per cent reported having experienced physical violence since age 15, and 3 per cent
reported experiencing sexual violence (Census 2010).
14. Around 23 per cent of households in Timor-Leste have an orphaned or fostered
child living with them. Over 3,500 children in Timor-Leste live in orphanages and
boarding houses, none of which are currently licensed or regulated.
15. The Government submitted its consolidated second and third periodic report on
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two Optional
Protocols to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child in N ovember
2013. Significant legislation and governmental mechanisms supporting progress
towards gender equality have been created, such as the establishment of Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality, with gender focal points positioned within each
Ministry, and the Law against Domestic Violence in 2010. Improved gender equality,
however, can only be achieved if implementation frameworks are developed and the
institutional and human capacity strengthened.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2009-2014
Key results achieved
16. The 2009-2014 country programme contributed to the achievement of a number
of national development results and objectives through advocacy, expanded
partnerships and the provision of quality technical assistance.
17. In collaboration with WHO, UNICEF provided technical and financial support
to the Ministry of Health to eliminate maternal and neonatal tetanus and introduced
the pentavalent vaccine. An integrated measles campaign in 2011 reached over
400,000 children aged 6 months to 14 years. Community management of diarrhoea
and pneumonia, now adopted as a national strategy, was initially introduced in two
districts with UNICEF support. The Ministry of Health, the non -governmental
organization (NGO) Alola Foundation and UNICEF supported the establishment of
mother support groups, which undertake community nutrition and child health
promotion activities, in 27 per cent of all sucos (villages), or 120 sucos in total. With
UNICEF support, community management of acute malnutrition, vitamin A
supplementation, deworming, nutritional status screening and infant and young child
feeding practices were introduced and operationalized in the districts by the Ministry
of Health. As a result, over 3,200 children, out of a total of 21,499 children with severe
acute malnutrition, were treated between 2009 and 2013.
18. Over 27,000 Timorese benefited from access to clean water with UNICEF
support through the installation of 81 water systems in 6 districts. An addition al
58,000 people in over 9,500 households gained access to improved sanitation. In
partnership with the Australian Government, UNICEF supported the Ministry of
Health and the Ministry of Public Works in drafting a national basic sanitation policy
and national sanitation strategic plan for rural areas which incorporate the
community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach. CLTS modelling was undertaken,
and 62 communities have been certified as “open defecation free”.
19. Pre-school education was prioritized by the Government with the development
of the National Framework for Pre-School Education and establishment of the
National Directorate for Pre-School Education. The child-friendly school approach,

5/12

adopted by the Ministry of Education for nationwide expansion, was expanded to
cover 121 schools, reaching 34,000 students annually. UNICEF supported the
development and roll-out of the national pre-secondary curricula in partnership with
the University of Minho in Portugal. Complementing the Government ’s own
resources, UNICEF funded the construction of 81 classrooms in 32 schools, and
rehabilitated an additional 36 classrooms in 11 schools. Over 12,000 students, the
majority in remote areas, benefited from this support. More than 15,000 students in
91 schools enjoyed improved water and sanitation facilities.
20. UNICEF supported first-time young voters to participate in the 2012 national
presidential and parliamentary elections; with UNICEF assistance, the Timor -Leste
Youth Parliament was established and endorsed b y the Council of Ministers.
21. The National Commission on the Rights of the Child was established in 2009,
with technical support from UNICEF. UNICEF assisted in developing the Child and
Family Welfare System Policy, which has been approved, and the Chil d Rights Code
and the Law on the Administration of Juvenile Justice, which are both pending
approval. Actions to increase and sustain birth registration coverage were also
supported by UNICEF; this includes the 2011 campaign and training of all civil
registry officers, 95 per cent of suco chiefs and around 20 per cent of midwives.
22. UNICEF provided technical support for the 13 district child protection officers ’
improved capacity on case management and referral. Improved child -friendly police
services, including the establishment of special child-friendly interview rooms in the
Vulnerable Person’s Unit of the National Police in all districts, have also been
supported by UNICEF.
23. In cooperation with other partners, UNICEF supported the key national data
collection activities led by the General Directorate of Statistics, including the 2010
Census and the 2009-2010 Demographic and Health Survey. Timor-Leste DevInfo
and CensusInfo were developed to support the dissemination and analysis of the
survey results.
24. UNICEF continued to place children on the agenda of key decision makers
through strategic meetings with Government leaders including the President, Prime
Minister, Vice Prime Minister, President of the Parliament and relevant ministers, and
with the church leaders and heads of development partners. The local media covered
children’s issues on a regular basis and were provided with briefings and orientations
for improved reportage on children. Eight out of 16 community radio stations aired
weekly children’s radio programmes with UNICEF support.
Lessons learned
25. UNICEF must continue supporting basic service delivery. Timor-Leste has
reached middle-income status, with a gross domestic product and petroleum fund that
have been growing at a steady rate. In social development, however, the country still
has many human development features of a lower-income country. UNICEF must
continue to support modelling service delivery activities while providing technical
support to policy development and system strengthening.
26. There is a need for UNICEF and other development partners to maintain and
even scale up the present levels of commitment and interventions in order for the
country to properly sustain and leverage the progress and gains made in human
development and institution building over the past 10 years. Insufficient capacity is

6/12

likely to remain as a major challenge; UNICEF and other United Nations agencies
must enhance their focus on institutional and human capacity-building.
27. Strengthening monitoring systems to generate and analyse relevant data is
required to respond to Timor-Leste’s rapidly evolving development environment and
growing focus on social sector. The unavailability of regular updated data and key
information from the field to inform policy, programming, and implementation
represented significant bottlenecks. Efforts must be made to provide “real-time”
feedback loops for policy development and effective implementation.
28. Families, including children and adolescents, and communities must be
supported to demand quality services. Aside from the critical roles that community
leaders play in knowledge transfer and in influencing attitudes to overcome prevailing
negative social practices, community members must demand access to services to
improve children’s lives. Better understanding of existing barriers and subsequent
awareness-raising of community leaders and village-level support mechanisms, such
as health volunteers, mother support groups, adolescents’ peer groups, parent-teacher
associations, water users groups and others are required to improve results for
children.

The country programme
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child health and nutrition

780

20 000

20 780

Quality education

780

20 000

20 780

Child protection and participation

570

9 000

9 570

Social inclusion

2 500

4 000

6 500

Cross-sectoral

1 020

2 000

3 020

Total

5 650

55 000

60 650

Preparation process
29. Preparation of the country programme was led by the Ministry of Finance and
synchronized with the formulation of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2015-2020. The process was guided by the National Strategic
Development Plan 2011-2030, the fifth Constitutional Government’s Programme
2012-2017, sector strategic plans, the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014 -2017 and the
findings of the midterm review of the current country programme. It was informed by
an updated equity-focused situation analysis of children and women in Timor-Leste,
extensive consultations with government ministries, development partners and civil
society and a high-level review and strategy consultation meeting convened jointly
by the Government and UNICEF.

7/12

Programme components, results and strategies
30. In support of the Timor-Leste National Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030,
the overall goal of the 2015-2019 country programme is to accelerate the realization
of the rights of all children to survival, development, protection and participation.
UNICEF will support the Government to identify key bottlenecks that constrain the
realization of the rights of disadvantaged children, supported by advocacy, planning,
action and monitoring aimed at reducing infant, child and maternal mortality,
improving nutritional status of children and mothers, expanding quality pre -school
and basic education, and improving prevention and response to child abus e, neglect,
violence and exploitation.
31. The country programme is framed around four mutually reinforcing strategies
to reduce disparities and reach the most disadvantaged children: (a) generating data
and evidence to inform advocacy and policy development for children;
(b) strengthening systems at institutional level to enhance social services;
(c) providing technical assistance to strengthen human capacity to deliver quality
social services, and (d) strengthening partnerships, particularly thos e at community
level for improving use of and demand for quality services.
32. UNICEF and partners will apply a gender lens to all programming, addressing
the barriers undermining girls’ and boys’ realization of their rights. A dual approach
towards supporting adolescent development will be adopted, incorporating an
adolescent-sensitive approach to all programme cooperation, along with actions that
specifically support adolescents. Programme assistance will incorporate actions to
promote resilience-strengthening of children, adolescents, families and communities.
Aspects of emergency preparedness and response are integrated into the health,
nutrition, education, water and sanitation and child protection programmes. Elements
of disaster risk reduction will be integrated into the child-friendly schools approach.
33. The programme will operate nationwide, but will emphasize support for
modelling and strengthening of essential services in an integrated manner in five
priority districts with weak child development indicators. A rigorous approach to
gather evidence to inform national policy, standards and potential nationwide scale up will be employed.
34. Consisting of four components, the country programme will contribute towards
the achievement of the following outcomes by 2019, with a specific emphasis on the
most vulnerable children:
(a) Reduced child mortality and malnutrition through improved and equitable
use of quality high-impact health, nutrition and water, sanitation and hygiene
education (WASH) interventions;
(b) Improved and equitable access to and quality of inclusive early learning
and basic education, and increased basic education retention, completion and
achievement rates;
(c) Improved and equitable use of a child care and protection system that
effectively protects children from violence, exploitation, abuse, and neglect;
(d) Strengthened advocacy for protection of the rights of children and the
generation of high-quality evidence and knowledge to inform the development of
equity-sensitive and child-centred social policies.

8/12

35. Child health and nutrition. UNICEF will support the Ministry of Health to
reduce malnutrition, mortality and morbidity among children under five years.
Support will be provided to update and implement health policies, stan dards and
procedures; expand coverage and enhance the quality of high -impact basic services
in nutrition, health, sanitation and hygiene; and strengthen the health management
information system, including the introduction of information technology -based
solutions for surveillance and real-time data collection and analysis.
36. Nutrition interventions will focus on the first 1,000 days of life. Support will
aim to accelerate efforts to improve coverage of high-impact nutrition interventions,
including improving nutrient intake and care of pregnant mothers, infant and young
child feeding and care practices, detection and treatment of acute malnutrition,
provision of micronutrient supplements and deworming and use of iodized salt.
UNICEF will support implementation of multisectoral national nutrition strategies,
guidelines and protocols; develop capacity of managers and service providers; assist
in establishing a performance management system; and support generation and use of
evidence to inform programme and policy. UNICEF will assist the Ministry of Health
to model, for replication and expansion, a nutrition systems -strengthening approach
in five priority districts, which is expected to benefit around 430,000 people,
including 56,600 children under five years of age. In addition, UNICEF will continue
to advocate for multisectoral nutrition sensitive policies, interventions and resources,
necessary for preventing stunting and wasting.
37. UNICEF will support maternal, neonatal and child health (MNCH)
interventions, including antenatal care, essential newborn care, postnatal care,
immunization, community case management of pneumonia and diarrhoea. The
support will focus on improving service delivery in health posts and community
health centres and promoting family and community behaviour and practices around
maternal and child health. To ensure synergy of efforts and impact MNCH
interventions will converge with the nutrition interventions at the district level. In
addition, technical support will be provided to imp rove care of sick newborns,
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS and paediatric HIV
treatment. MNCH initiatives will be well documented and will be used to inform
policies and strategies.
38. UNICEF will continue to support WASH services in rural communities,
focusing on scaling-up of CLTS in priority districts through partnership with the
Ministries of Health and Public Works, NGOs and development partners. Support will
be provided for the development of an effective CLTS monitoring mech anism and
community capacity development to manage water systems, improve sanitation
facilities and enhance hygiene practices. In collaboration with WHO, technical
assistance will be provided to develop minimum WASH standards for health posts in
rural areas.
39. Quality education. UNICEF will support the Government of Timor-Leste to
reduce high repetition and dropout rates, and improve learning outcomes for students.
UNICEF will focus on improving school readiness through pre -school learning,
increasing equitable access to quality basic education, and improving water, sanitation
and hygiene in schools.
40. To improve school readiness and ensure the quality of pre -school programmes,
UNICEF will provide technical assistance for the development of national sta ndards,
guidelines and a monitoring system. UNICEF will continue to support the

9/12

Government’s efforts in modelling pre-schools, applying the child-friendly school
approach, and will provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Education to scale
up child-friendly pre-schools as investment in school readiness improve learning
outcomes. This will include support for teacher recruitment and training, development
of teaching-learning materials, intensifying community awareness raising and
promotion of inter-ministerial cooperation mechanisms. UNICEF will also support
the Ministry to develop community-based alternative pre-school learning
programmes for remote communities.
41. To improve equitable access to quality basic education, UNICEF will continue
to support the child-friendly school approach, undertake district and school-based
capacity development, strengthen education management systems, improve school
learning environments, including classrooms and address violence at schools.
Technical support will be provided to improve school-based management and followup after child-friendly school training, including mentoring support for teachers and
training of school directors, deputy directors, school coordinators, parent -teacher
associations and student councils, as well as community approaches to improve access
to education opportunities for out-of-school children, including those with
disabilities. UNICEF will provide technical assistance to the development of a
national learning assessment system by the Ministry of Education, disaggregated data
analysis improvements and the overall management information system. Life -skills
education, including aspects of HIV/AIDS prevention, will use existing modules
designed for specific age groups.
42. UNICEF will support the achievement of the Government’s goal of ensuring
that all public schools have access to clean water and sanitation facilities by 2020,
particularly in priority districts. This will include support for the installation of water
supply as well as toilets and hand washing facilities that are child-friendly and gendersensitive. Lessons learned and best practices will be captured and used for nationwide
scale-up by the Government and other development partners.
43. Child protection and participation. UNICEF will support the Government to
strengthen the child care and protection system. Technical support will be provided
to the Ministry of Social Solidarity and Ministry of Justice to improve child and
family welfare, enhance justice for children, strengthen birth registration, and
promote cross-sectoral collaboration with the Government and non-governmental
organizations to expand services that prevent and respond to violence, abuse, neglect
and exploitation.
44. Support will be provided for the development of legislative and policy
frameworks to regulate and standardize care and protection services to children, and
to build the capacity of legislative officers, judicial officers, law enforcers, social
welfare officers, teachers, and health workers to expand quality services to children.
UNICEF will support the Ministry of Social Solidarity to strengthen the capacity of
families and communities to care for and protect children. Continued efforts will be
given to develop a child-friendly justice system and practice in Timor-Leste.
45. UNICEF will continue to support the Youth Parliament with the aim of
empowering the Youth Parliamentarians to advocate for children and adolescents ’
development. They will be pioneers and opinion leaders among children and
adolescents supporting activities on life-skills, peacebuilding and risk reduction,
HIV/AIDS prevention, and organizing and facilitating youth development activities

10/12

that mitigate violence. Dialogue between the Youth Parliament and the National
Parliament will be promoted.
46. Social inclusion. UNICEF will support the creation of a sound national
monitoring and evaluation system. In order to improve the availability of
disaggregated child-centred data that highlight existing inequities, assistance will be
provided to reinforce knowledge management and institutional capacity in the
General Directorate of Statistics and social sector ministries through the expanded
use of DevInfo, the introduction of innovative technological models and the
establishment of a publicly accessible Child Knowledge Centre. UNICEF will also
collaborate in national data collection activities, particularly the 2015 National
Population and Housing Census and the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey.
Support will also be provided to strengthen social sector capacity in planning, policy
formulation and budgeting, including through South-South cooperation. In supporting
the decentralization process, UNICEF will assist with the development of subnational
planning and monitoring mechanisms, including the testing of models that allow real time data collection and monitoring.
47. In partnership with the Ministry of Finance and key social sector ministries and
in collaboration with the World Bank and other development partners, UNICEF will
provide support to conduct high-quality policy and expenditure analysis to support
the development of policies and implementation strategies. This will include
documentation and evaluation of pilot models of service delivery at local level, to
inform the allocation and expenditure of national budgets in the social sector.
UNICEF will also support institutional and human capacity building in evidence based budget planning, monitoring and execution for social sector ministries.
48. UNICEF will reach out to national opinion leaders, community leaders and the
media to further promote a child rights protective environment and to raise the profile
of children in national development. The media will be supported to enhance ethical
and responsive reporting on children’s development, challenges and opportunities. At
community level, raising awareness on positive caring behaviours will be supported.
49. Cross-sectoral. This programme will support emergency preparedness and
response activities and also cover programme support and operational functions to
ensure effective and efficient implementation of the country programme.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
50. The country programme is fully aligned with national priorities laid out in the
National Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030, the Program of the fifth
Constitutional Government 2012-2017 and the plans of the social sector ministries. It
will directly contribute to UNDAF outcomes. UNICEF will promote coherence of
United Nations activities in Timor-Leste and will continue to actively collaborate with
other United Nations agencies to implement the UNDAF, including through joint
programming, monitoring and evaluation activities and thematic working groups.
Relationship to international priorities
51. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
and post-2015 discussions. It emphasizes accelerating actions towards four of the
Millennium Development Goal targets where Timor-Leste is lagging behind (child

11/12

nutrition; maternal mortality; access to sanitation; and primary school completion),
as well as focusing on reducing disparities. It supports the peacebuilding and state building goals defined in A New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, led by the
Group of Seven Plus (g7+) nations.

Major partnerships
52. UNICEF will continue to work closely with the Government of the Republic of
Timor-Leste, particularly the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Finance,
Education, Health, Public Works, Justice, and Social Solidarity and the Secretary of
State for Youth and Sports and the National Commission on Child Rights. Under the
Development Policy Coordination Mechanism (DPCM) led by the Prime Minister,
UNICEF will continue to actively participate in the education, health, social
protection, water and sanitation infrastructure, youth, and jus tice subsectors and
collaborate with the Government and other development partners.
53. Strengthened links will be forged with the European Union and the Government
of Australia on nutrition and water and sanitation, with New Zealand in pre -school
education and with the Government of Norway around issues of health, nutrition and
child protection. New partnerships will be sought with the World Bank in the field of
social policy analysis and advocacy for child-centred social protection. UNICEF will
be fully engaged in the work in Timor-Leste under several international support
initiatives, including the GAVI Alliance and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria.
54. The Timor-Leste Youth Parliament will remain a key partner for UNICEF in
promoting the participation of young people and reducing their vulnerabilities to
violence and abuse. UNICEF will strengthen its partnerships with local NGOs, civil
society organizations, faith-based organizations and community leaders to improve
individual and family knowledge, practices and demand for services. UNICEF will
continue to work with other United Nations agencies in implementing the UNDAF.

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
55. The Ministry of Finance has overall responsibility for the coordination and
management of the country programme on behalf of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. The programme will be managed on an ongoing
basis by the Country Management Team and assessed at end -year and midterm
reviews with the Government and other development partners. Key indicators for
monitoring progress towards country programme outcomes are presented in the
Summary Results Matrix. The monitoring framework for the country programme will
be set out in the five-year integrated monitoring and evaluation plan, and aligned with
the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation framework. Core national data collection
exercises include the 2015 Census and 2016 District Health Survey.
56. Evaluations will be carried out on key initiatives, jointly with the Government
and other partners as relevant, to draw lessons and to inform policies and programme
decision-making.

12/12

