Togo
Country programme document
2014-2018

The draft country programme document for Togo
(E/ICEF/2013/P/L.8) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2013 annual session (18-21 June
2013).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2013 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 6 September 2013.

†

Basic data
(2011 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)

1.4/1.4

U5MR (per 1 000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

110
17
19/15; 10/20; 21/9
300 a

Maternal mortality rate (per 100 000 live births, adjusted for 2010)
Use of improved drinking water resources (%)

61

Use of improved sanitation services (%)

13

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

81

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

67

Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)

91/87

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, male/female)

94/85

HIV prevalence rate among adults (%, 15-49 years, male/female)

3.4
3.2 c

HIV prevalence rate among pregnant women (%)
Child work (%, 5-14 years, male/female)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

28/29
78
78/78; 93/71; 59/97

GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

560

Additional data on children and women, as well as methodological notes on the estimates,
can also be found at www.childinfo.org/.
The estimate given here represents the adjusted maternal mortality rate calculated by the
United Nations Interagency Maternal Mortality Estimation Group. The estimate reported at
the country level is 300 deaths per 100 000 live births (2010).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Togo has experienced a period of stabilization and some improvement in its
economy over the past five years. The growth rate of the gross national income
(GNI) reached 3.9 per cent in 2011. The growth was stimulated by the resumption of
international cooperation, but also by the economic and financial reforms. High
population growth — estimated at 2.84 per cent according to the most recent census
(2010) — has absorbed a large part of the benefits of growth and puts pressure on
the provision of social services. The poverty level of the population remains high
(58.7 per cent). 1 The monetary poverty rate declined slightly between 2006 and 2011,
but the extreme poverty rate rose from 28.6 per cent in 2006 to 30.4 per cent in 2011.
Inequalities between the rich and the poor have increased, and significant disparities
remain among regions: the poverty rate reaches 90 per cent in the Savanes region,
compared to 31 per cent in Lomé. An analysis of multidimensional poverty also shows
that the Savanes region has the largest proportion of disadvantaged children. The
vulnerability of communities to climate-caused disturbances, with floods in the South
and a deficit of rainfall in the North, remains high.
2.
The under-five mortality rate remained static between 2006 and 2010 and is
particularly high in the two northern regions, namely, 167 per thousand in the Kara
__________________
1

2

Survey based on the Questionnaire on the Basic Indicators of Well-being, 2011.

region and 144 per thousand in the Savanes region. 2 Neonatal causes and malaria
are responsible for 50 per cent of child deaths, 31 per cent and 18 per cent
respectively. 3 Forty-four per cent of children under five suffer from stunted growth
in the Savanes region, compared to a national average of 29 per cent. HIV
prevalence was 3.4 per cent in the population and 1.5 per cent (M: 0.9/ F 2.2) among
young people aged 15 to 24 years. 4 Difficulties related to geographic access,
financial barriers and the lack of information have limited the demand for services
and constrain the adoption of family practices conducive to good child growth.
Analysis of the disaggregated data available does not reveal gender disparities in the
use of services by children. Access to water and sanitation remains limited,
especially in rural areas, where only 39 per cent of households have access to
drinking water and 12 per cent to improved latrines.
3.
The abolition of school fees in 2008 led to an increase in school attendance,
estimated at 91 per cent for boys and 87 per cent for girls in 2010. The completion
rate shows significant regional disparities, since only 49 per cent of girls complete
primary school in the Savanes region and 59 per cent in the Plateaux region, 5 as
against a national average of 70 per cent for girls (overall national average:
75 per cent). Factors such as the number of qualified teachers and classrooms, and
the availability of pedagogical equipment, limit the quality of primary education.
High repetition rates, school violence and opportunity costs are the common causes
of the abandonment of schooling. 6 Vulnerable children, such as those with
disabilities and those engaged in labour, often remain outside the education syste m.
4.
Child labour is widespread, estimated at 28 per cent for boys and 29 per cent
for girls. Nearly half a million children do not live with their biological family.
Severe physical punishment is common (17 per cent of children aged 2 to 14 years).
Over 30 per cent of children under five have not been registered at birth in rural
areas. Child trafficking persists, despite Government efforts. In January 2012, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that Togo adopt the national
policy on child protection approved in December 2008.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2008-2013
Key results
5.
The 2008-2013 programme has contributed to the development of the National
Health Sector Development Plan (PNDS) and operational action plans at the district
level based on an analysis of bottlenecks with the participation of claim holders. A
semi-annual monitoring system has been established. A national strategy for
integrated community-based interventions developed in 2010 has been implemented.
The programme has contributed to the implementation of the strategy by developing
__________________
2

3
4
5

6

2010 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS); all the data not otherwise referenced are taken
from MICS 2010.
Child Health Epidemiology Reference Group 2012.
2012 Report on the global AIDS epidemic.
Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education and Literacy (MEPSA) Annual Statistical Report
for the 2011-2012 school year.
Report on the identification of children outside the school system — “Child to Child”, MEPSA,
2012.

3

training materials and training 960 community health workers (CHWs), 7 thus
facilitating access to a high-impact package for 70,000 children under five living in
villages remote from health facilities. In all, 349 health facilities and 565 community
health workers have acquired the capacity to treat severely malnourished children at
the community level. The introduction of community-led total sanitation in 2010
and methods of manual drilling in 2012 has the potential to improve access to
sanitation and drinking water at low cost.
6.
In 2012, 81 per cent 8 of children under five 9 slept under insecticide-treated
mosquito nets. An essential package for newborns was defined; at the end of 2012,
10 per cent of health facilities providing obstetrical care services had been
equipped, and staff had been trained, with a target of 100 per cent. The proportion of
health facilities providing services for the prevention of mother to child
transmission (PMTCT) of HIV increased from 5 per cent to 64 per cent between
2007 and 2012. 10 UNICEF has helped to train staff at 236 sites and equipment has
been provided to all sites. The proportion of pregnant women tested for HIV
increased from 8 per cent in 2007 to 45 per cent in 2012. Early diagnosis of HIV is
now offered at 136 facilities (none in 2009).
7.
The programme supported the development and adoption of a sectoral
education plan (PSE, 2010-2020) and the elaboration of the corresponding regional
plans. A community approach to early childhood development was implemented in
rural areas, benefiting 8,142 children (3,939 girls) in 2012 in 129 early childhood
centres. 11 That experience will have a bearing on the national strategy now b eing
developed. With a view to improving the quality of education, the programme has
contributed to the training of 5,000 volunteer teachers without pre-service training
serving in disadvantaged rural areas. An inclusive education model for the
integration of children with disabilities has been developed in collaboration with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and associations of persons with
disabilities. Some 359 children with a disability have been given access to
education, and more than 700 teachers have been trained in inclusive pedagogy.
8.
The Children’s Code, adopted in 2007, has been widely disseminated.
Ratification of the Hague Convention and the Palermo Protocol and the adoption of
a new law on the organization of civil registration, with the extension of the period
of registration of births to 45 days, represent significant progress. The creation of
mechanisms for the integrated management and monitoring of child victims of
violence and the better coordination of stakeholders has contributed to the
strengthening of the national protection system. A situation analysis of the birth
registration process, based on the analysis of bottlenecks, has resulted in the
adoption of a national strategy. As the lead partner in social protection, UNICEF has
contributed to the development of a National Social Protection Policy, which was
validated in 2012.

__________________
7
8

9
10
11

4

End of 2012.
Independent survey conducted by the Peace Corps covering the entire country excluding Lomé
Commune, 2012.
Excluding Lomé.
403 facilities out of 627.
MEPSA-UNICEF Annual Report 2012; same for the number of awareness centres.

Lessons learned
9.
Community self-reliance systems helped maintain access to basic social
services, education and health during the years of the sociop olitical crisis. With
varying success the programme supported sectoral community-based approaches in
those communities. However, the lack of effective interaction between the different
components has limited the impact of those interventions. The situation calls for a
holistic approach, effectively supporting the participation of the most vulnerable and
strengthening the capacities of the rights holders.
10. Following the recommendation of the midterm review, the management of the
programme was decentralized through the establishment of workplans developed at
the regional level for each programme component from 2011 to 2013. Although the
decentralization process is not yet effective in Togo, the programme has worked
with the Government in its efforts to bring the management of social services closer
to communities. That approach has made it possible to involve stakeholders at the
decentralized level, empower regional directors of planning in their role as
development coordinators and adjust strategies to local realities so as to achieve
results.
11. The analysis of bottlenecks at the district level has shown that the peripheral
health centres receive only limited funding from the central level. Cost recovery
from patients can result in excessive prescription, which is detrimental to poor
families. The management of the funds is entrusted to community management
committees, whose function should be re-evaluated. Besides strengthening the
integrated package of interventions at the field level, the programme shoul d be more
involved in the health system management so as to achieve the desired results.
12. Working with the Government, the programme has established a hot line to
report cases of violence against minors, along with a set of services: a transit centre,
legal assistance, and medical and psychosocial support. The line has been
operational since 2009 and receives an average of 500 calls per day. An independent
evaluation was carried out and proved positive. Initially, the line was operated by
the Ministry of Social Action and National Solidarity (MASSN), while the transit
centre was run by an NGO. In December 2011, all services came under the
responsibility of the Ministry, which now pays more than 50 per cent of the costs.
Ownership by the State ensures the sustainability of the system. Replication of this
experiment could be considered in other areas where NGO intervention is necessary
in order to get innovative initiatives up and running but may give way later to a
gradual takeover by the State.

5

The country programme, 2014-2018
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Child survival and growth

5 733

29 628

35 361

Education and development

3 847

9 893

13 740

Child protection and adolescent empowerment

3 547

8 506

12 053

Social policy and advocacy

2 729

4 973

7 702

Intersectoral

1 481

–

1 481

Total

17 337

53 000

70 337

Preparation process
13. The preparation of the United Nations Development Assistanc e Framework
(UNDAF) for 2014-2018 was initiated in the early stages of the validation of the
Government’s Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion (SCAPE
2013-2017), on which the UNDAF is aligned. Preparation of the new country
programme was initiated simultaneously with the UNDAF and in synch with the
changes introduced at the midterm review to strengthen the focus on equity.
14. The opinions of women, school-age girls and boys, teachers and health
workers in the vulnerable communities were gathered in the context of the analysis
of the situation of children and women and were taken into account, as were the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in January 2012. The
preparation of the country programme was coordinated by the Ministry of Planning,
Development and Regional Planning (MPDAT) and included consultations with
relevant ministries and the regional and prefectural authorities, as well as with
development partners and NGOs.
Programme components, results and strategies
15. The overall goal of the country programme is to serve as a catalyst for action
to reduce disparities, including those related to gender, and to promote children’s
rights to survival, development, protection and participation, while strengthen ing
the resilience of their families. The programme covers the entire country, with a
focus on the most disadvantaged areas. It includes three main components and a
component for socioeconomic analysis and advocacy, and supports the national
priorities of the SCAPE: reducing child mortality to 57 per thousand; reducing the
prevalence of underweight among children under five years from 17 per cent to
12 per cent; reaching a net enrolment rate of 96 per cent and a completion rate of
90 per cent for primary education, with a ratio of 0.97 between girls and boys: the
participation of 18 per cent of children aged 4-5 years in preschool education; the
use of antiretroviral therapy by more than 85 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant
women; access to improved latrines for 55 per cent of the population (excluding
Lomé): systematic birth registration of all newborns; implementation of social
safety nets for the most vulnerable families, especially those with children.

6

16. The results of the programme are expected to derive from actions in the
following areas: (a) the political, legal and normative environment; (b) improvement
of service provision by strengthening the capacit y of service providers; and
(c) improvement of demand by strengthening the capacity of rights hold ers to seek
and use quality services. The programme is based o n the following strategies:
(a) advocacy for increasing budgetary allocations to social sectors, guided by
socioeconomic analyses; (b) raising funds for children and supporting their efficient
use; (c) the complementarity and effectiveness of partnerships; (d) the development
of various models of service delivery and demand creation adapted to diverse regional
typologies; (e) the continuation of the decentralized approach to programme
management with an emphasis on community participation; (f) facilitating South South exchange of experiences; (g) strengthening the documentation of interventions
so as to guide national strategies; (h) a focus on gender and adolescent issues, with
the strengthening of life skills; (i) the identification of the vulnerabilities of children
in peri-urban areas and the responses required; and (j) strategies for disaster
prevention and mitigation and education on climate change.
(i)

Child survival and growth
17. This component, which supports the National Health Sector Development Plan
(PNDS), seeks to contribute to the reduction of the morbidity and mortality among
newborn and young children associated with neonatal complications, malaria,
diarrhoea, pneumonia, vaccine-preventable diseases, HIV and malnutrition. To
achieve those results, the programme will work at different levels of the system.
18. On the one hand, the skills of families will be strengthened through the
adoption of key family practices, including those related to nutrition, hygiene and
sanitation, promoting good health and child nutrition, the better use of preventive
services and timely care-seeking behaviour in the event of illness. In addition, in
100 per cent of the villages in 16 districts of the Kara, Plateaux and Savanes regions
households will no longer practise open defecation. On the other hand, the supply of
services will be improved to: (a) ensure the availability of a package of essential
health care to all newborns in health facilities; (b) strengthen the vaccination
coverage; (c) implement effective preventive and curative measures against malaria;
(d) expand and improve the quality of the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT) by ensuring effective monitoring of the mother-child pair
and access to treatment for infected children; (e) implement the national strategic
nutrition plan; and (f) implement the strategic plan for the water sector.
19. Operational action plans focusing on the removal of bottlenecks affecting
supply and demand in the twelve districts of Kara and Savanes, which show the
highest rates of child mortality in the country, will be supported in order to
implement corrective strategies, including the strengthening of a package of high impact health and nutrition interventions at the community level, with the goal of
reducing disparities in the effective coverage of services.
20. At the upstream level, this component will strengthen the availability of
medicines and basic commodities and their affordability in the field, as well as a
more equitable distribution of qualified personnel. Other measures, such as payment
based on performance and the implementation of social protection measures in the
health area, will be adopted. This component will support the insti tutionalization of
annual planning and monitoring in the health districts, focusing on the regions of

7

Kara and Savanes for equity reasons, on a suburban district of Lomé and on a rural
district with a high population density, so as to build various models of corrective
strategies.
21. Key partners include the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Water, the World
Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Agence français e de
développement (AFD), the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
the GAVI Alliance, the World Bank, the African Development Bank (AfDB), the
European Union (EU) and NGOs.
(ii)

Education and development
22. This component is aligned with the objectives of the sectoral education plan
(PSE) to ensure high-quality basic education to every child and aims to achieve a
net enrolment rate of 96 per cent with parity in the girl/boy ratio, a gross preschool
attendance rate of 20 per cent and a net completion rate of 90 per cent for girls and
boys in 25 school inspectorates of the Savanes and Plateaux regions, which are now
significantly below the national average.
23. The component will use: (a) advocacy based on the documented experience in
the adoption of a model of alternative education for working children and the
inclusion in the PSE of adequate educational options for children with disabilities;
and (b) capacity-building for effective implementation of the planned school
mapping and improved management of human resources, leading to a reduction in
disparities in the distribution of teachers. The recruitment of female teachers will be
encouraged in order to achieve progress towards gender equality in the teaching
profession. Support will be provided for the planning, monitoring and production of
reliable education statistics.
24. The component will support the introduction of life skills education into
primary schools and strengthen protection and participation of children through the
prevention of violence in schools, the establishment of student governments and
training in the rights of the child. The school environment will be improved through
the provision of water and sanitation in schools and the introduction of the concept
of the green school.
25. The component will seek to reduce disparities in completion rates in 25 school
inspectorates in the Savanes and Plateaux regions by: (a) developing school -level
projects and monitoring bottlenecks as a decision-making tool at the level of schools
and inspectorates, and (b) mobilizing community child protection committees, social
action workers, parent-teacher associations and school management committees to
promote local initiatives aimed at reducing school dropout rates, the establishment
of tutoring, the integration of out-of-school children and the prevention of early
marriages.
26. UNICEF supports the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education and
Literacy (MEPSA), leads the donors-partners’ group and works with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Food
Programme, the Agence française de développement (AFD), the World Bank, the
Global Partnership for Girls’ and Women’s Education, NGOs and civil society.

8

(iii)

Child protection and adolescent empowerment
27. This component supports the implementation of the Strategy for Accelerated
Growth and Employment Promotion (SCAPE) by strengthening the resilience of
vulnerable families, strengthening the protection systems for boys and girls against
violence and working to promote positive behaviours that reduce the vulnerabilities
of children and young people.
28. This component will facilitate: (a) the impact assessment of a child-centred
cash transfer pilot project funded by the World Bank and embedded in the nutrition
programme to guide the national strategy for social protection, and (b) the policy
dialogue needed to implement this strategy, including programmes targeting
vulnerable children with a view to covering at least 4 per cent of children by 2018 .
29. The national system of child protection will be strengthened by the
consolidation of community structures in the Kara and Savanes regions, by the
adaptation of the model to the suburban areas around Lomé and by the support of
the Ministry of Social Action and National Solidarity (MASSN) for: (a) the extension
of the integrated mechanism for the detection, management and monitoring of abused
children, so as to assist at least 3,000 abused children per year; and (b) improving
the mechanisms for regulation, supervision and coordination at all levels and
strengthening information management with the annual production of report cards.
30. The component will support the Government in its efforts to revise the legal
framework and report on commitments made at the international level for the
protection of children and women. Implementation of the national birth registration
plan will be facilitated. The number of children without birth certificates will be
halved in the Savanes and Kara regions and in five disadvantaged boroughs of Lomé
through the institutionalization of a mechanism for monitoring bottlenecks in the
supply and use of civil registration services and the identification of corrective
actions. The model will be documented so as to support advocac y. The
strengthening of a justice system that is fair for children in contact with the law will
be implemented in order to ensure that each year at least 75 per cent of the case files
opened dealing with violence against children are treated according to i nternational
standards of juvenile justice. Children’s participation will be facilitated by raising
awareness among adults and strengthening the capacity of young people to play a
more active role in their schools and communities. Adolescent empowerment wi ll be
enhanced by the introduction of life skills education in primary schools and in
programmes run by NGOs.
31. The Ministry of Social Action and National Solidarity (MASSN), the Ministry
of Primary and Secondary Education and Literacy (MEPSA), the Mini stries of
Justice, Territorial Administration, Labour, and Basic Development, UNFPA, the
International Labour Office (ILO), the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the World Bank, NGOs and civil society are key partners.

(iv)

Socioeconomic analysis and advocacy
32. This component will contribute to the implementation of the priorities set in
the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion (SCAPE) for the
social sectors by supporting: (a) the production and use of disaggregated data
measuring poverty, disparities and discrimination, including data relating to gender;
and (b) planning, budgeting and efficient use of resources promoting equity in the

9

survival, education, protection and development of all children, supported by
appropriate socioeconomic analyses. These analyses will enable greater coherence
in the allocation of the State and partners’ resources with the budgetary framework
of the SCAPE, establishing strategic partnerships with institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the African Development
Bank (AfDB) and the EU.
33. The skills of personnel at the national and decentralized levels will be
strengthened so as to improve the efficiency of planning, budgeting and
coordination between sectors and thereby reduce socioeconomic and geographic
disparities. The component will support the National Directorate of Statistics in the
production of national surveys measuring social indicators and the dissemination of
disaggregated data on children and women. Advocacy at the highest level will be
carried out on the basis of studies on child poverty, the impact of policies and the
effect of shocks, as well as on the identification of options for strengthening
resilience, so that national policies can be better focused on children. The use of
evaluations and studies will be facilitated by the development of dissemination
strategies adapted to the diversity of stakeholders, including communities and
households. Besides the partners already mentioned, the component will rely on
other main partners as well, namely, the Ministry of Planning, Development and
Regional Planning (MPDAT), UNDP and civil society organizations.
(v)

Intersectoral component
34. This component will provide support for the effective implementation of the
programme through the efficient management of budgets, procurement and logistics,
human resources and capacity development.
Relationship to national priorities and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework
35. The SCAPE covers five strategic areas: (a) the development of sectors with
high growth potential; (b) the strengthening of economic infrastructure; (c) the
development of human capital, social protection and the employment of young
people; (d) the strengthening of governance; and (e) the promotion of balanced and
sustainable participatory development. The UNDAF has been aligned with the
SCAPE and has developed actions in three areas: (a) strengthening the capacities of
the agricultural sector, the sustainable management of the environment and the
promotion of employment; (b) strengthening equitable access to quality basic social
services; and (c) enhancing governance so as to reduce inequalities. The country
programme contributes to six outcomes in area (b) and three outcomes in area (c).
Relationship to international priorities
36. The programme is structured on a sectoral basis, in line with the Government’s
programmes for achieving the goals of the Millennium Declaration. The programme
design was guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other
international conventions on the rights of children and women. The programme
supports the“ Promise Renewed” initiative for child survival and the activities of the
“United for Children against AIDS” campaign.
37. The programme incorporates the principles of the Paris Declaration, the Accra
Agenda and the Busan Agenda. It will contribute to the UNDAF in the

10

implementation of the recommendations of the 2012 q uadrennial comprehensive
policy review in the development of national capacities, the promotion of
sustainable development, the eradication of the causes of extreme poverty and
hunger, South-South cooperation, gender equality and the empowerment of women.
Major partnerships
38. The advocacy under way will be continued, working with the IMF and the EU
to influence State budget allocations and with AfDB to strengthen health sector
governance. UNICEF will continue its facilitation role with the Ministries of Health
and Education for the mobilization of resources from global funds and will actively
participate in sectoral committees set up as part of the national aid platform.
39. Existing partnerships will be maintained: with the French Government, WHO,
UNFPA and UN Women for the implementation of the Muskoka Initiative to reduce
maternal mortality and infant mortality; with WHO, UNDP, ILO and the World
Bank in the context of social protection; with WHO and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on issues relating to children with
disabilities; with all United Nations agencies on the response to HIV/AIDS; with
NGOs and local associations working in various social sectors. The media,
especially community radios, opinion leaders, religious leaders and parliamentarians,
will contribute to the achievement of results. The National Children’s Advisory
Council will be involved in the process of planning, implementing and monitoring
the programme. The programme will develop new alliances with youth groups,
women, persons with disabilities and other civil society organizations.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
40. The Ministry of Planning, Development and Regional Planning (MPDAT),
which is in charge of coordinating the programme, and UNICEF will support the
development of multi-year workplans for each component at the national and
regional levels and will monitor their implementation, including their intersectoral
dimensions. The role of the regional and prefectural governments will be
strengthened so as to promote decentralized management of the programme, which
will foster efficiency and equity by taking into account the realities on the ground —
and ownership on the part of stakeholders. At the national level, a unit responsible
for monitoring and evaluating the UNDAF will coordinate reviews. A monitoring
and evaluation plan will specify the various studies, evaluations and operational
research needed to document programme outcomes and expand information on the
situation of children and on socioeconomic, geographical and gender disparities.

11

