Tunisia
Country programme document
2015-2019

The draft country programme document for Tunisia
(E/ICEF/2014/P/L.8) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2014 annual session (3-6 June
2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data †
(2012 unless otherwise stated)
Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)

1.6/1.5

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

16

Underweight (per cent, moderate and severe, 2008)
(per cent, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

2
3/1, 2/2, 3/2

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

56

Use of improved drinking water sources (per cent, 2010)

96

Use of improved sanitation facilities (per cent, 2010)

90

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (per cent)

97 a

One-year-olds immunized against measles (per cent)

96 a

Primary school enrolment/attendance (per cent, net, male/female, 2008)

98/98

Survival rate to last primary grade (per cent, male/female, 2008)

97/96

Adult HIV prevalence rate (per cent, 15-49 years, male/female)

<0.1/<0.1

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (per cent)

..

Child labour (per cent, 5-14 year olds, male/female, 2011-2012)
Birth registration (per cent, under 5 years of age, 2011-2012)
(per cent, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

3/2
99
99/100, 100/98, 98/100

GNI per capita (US$)
†

a

4,150

Additional data on children and women as well as detailed methodological notes on estimates are
available on the website www.childinfo.org/.
The immunization figures reported in the above table are inter-agency estimates prepared by
WHO/UNICEF. Gender-disaggregated data are as follows, according to the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey (MICS), 2011-2012: with regard to DPT3, male: 94 per cent; female: 99 per
cent; with regard to measles, male: 94 per cent; female: 95 per cent.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
In January 2014, three years after the revolution, Tunisia adopted its new
Constitution, establishing the bases for a democratic State: checks and balances,
decentralization, increased parity within governance institutions, and preservation of
the civil character of the State. The addition of an article on the rights of the child to the
Constitution constitutes a further considerable achievement. The transitional period
weakened the country, which in 2013 experienced a slowdown in its economic recovery,
high unemployment among the young and the continuation of regional disparities,
causes of social tension. These difficulties could have an impact on the performance
of the social sectors and affect the most vulnerable groups, particularly children. A
Government consisting of independent persons has been designated and entrusted
with leading the country to legislative and presidential elections.
2.
Reducing the vulnerability of broad sections of the population is one of the main
challenges faced in the new national context. Extensive reforms are necessary. Analysis
of multiple hardships affecting children and other assessments and studies reveal that
the protection systems and social sectors have failed to diminish significantly the
regional disparities by type of area or socio-economic level.

2/11

3.
MDG 2, which concerns education, has been attained, with almost universal
school enrolment of children aged 6-11. MDG 3, which concerns gender parity at all
levels of education, has also been achieved, although girls still drop out in rural areas
and a greater number of boys drop out at the levels of secondary and higher education.
Analysis of dropping out of school (involving 100,000 school-age children in 2013) 1
highlights the inadequate quality of available education and the lack of effective
systems of governance at all levels. Difficult transition to secondary school is behind
many school failures, particularly among boys. The quality of scholastic achievement
is below expectations, school inclusion of children with disabilities remains low
(1,634 in 2012) 1 and the effectiveness and impact of reforms have been limited.
Access to preschool education is partial (44 and 79.5 per cent amon g children aged,
respectively, 3-4 and 5-6) 2 and characterized by deep social and geographic
disparities (with wealthy- versus poor-household rates of, respectively, 81 and 13 per
cent among 3-4 year-olds).
4.
Under-5 mortality (U5MR) has declined steeply since 1990 and therefore the
attainment of MDG 4 by 2015 is plausible. Efforts aimed at reducing neonatal
mortality, which accounts for two thirds of infant deaths, must increase. Indicators
reveal significant progress in antenatal care and deliveries in h ealth establishments,
particularly in the most disadvantaged regions. 3 However, maternal mortality remains
a major challenge, and if MDG 5 is to be attained, the Government must take drastic
measures, particularly in rural areas. Routine information manage ment is not adapted
to decision-making regarding the prevention of mothers’ deaths. HIV/AIDS
prevalence is low in the population as a whole but exceeds 5 per cent 4 in certain key
groups, which is characteristic of a concentrated epidemic. Programmes for ma ternal
and child health and for HIV/AIDS prevention remain vertical and the lack of
integration constitutes a major obstacle to universal access of mothers and children to
quality services.
5.
Progress achieved with respect to the protection of children co ncerns the
legislative environment, the withdrawal of the last reservations to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the enhancement of basic services. Certain
problems persist. Thus, the law is not effectively implemented and practi ces that do
not respect children’s physical integrity or morals continue. Girls and boys still suffer
parental violence (approximately one third of children aged 2 -14 years are victims of
physical violence). 2 Physical violence also takes place within institutions and at school.
The number of juvenile delinquents (mainly boys), which has been stable in recent years,
and the high rate of recidivism reveal a relative failure of social and family
rehabilitation. Although the number of children in institutions has not increased, the
duration of institutionalization has become longer. Bottlenecks occur as a result of the
lack of alternative methods (release under supervision, for instance), insufficient
information and networking among actors, strong centralizatio n and low quality of
services, particularly in disadvantaged regions.
1
2
3

4

Source: Ministry of Education.
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 4, 2011-2012.
MICS show for instance that in the period 2006-2012 the proportion of pregnant women having had
more than four antenatal consultations increased from 44.3 to 83.3 per cent in the Kairouan
governorate and from 66.8 to 85.1 per cent at the national level; and of those having given birth in a
health establishment, increased from 70.8 to nearly 100 per cent in the Kasserine governorate and
from 94.5 to 98.5 per cent at the national level.
Source: Ministry of Health.

3/11

6.
Progress achieved with respect to access to leisure activities concerns essentially
the infrastructure. However, access to leisure activities is characterized by inequality
based on the area of origin and on gender (to the detriment of girls), the library use
rate is low, and the quality of media programmes for children calls for improvement.
Adolescents and young persons, particularly girls, or approximately one third of the
population, do not sufficiently participate in public life. The key role they played in
the revolution has not translated into paying greater attention to their views within
the family, the school and civil society. Many associations are still dominated by
adults.
7.
In June 2010, improvements in the situation were noted in the concluding
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the third periodic report
of Tunisia. The Committee confirmed however the need for additional efforts to
improve the pre-school enrolment rate and the quality of education, to reduce the
school abandonment rate and the number of children in institutions and to introduce
alternatives to detention for adolescents in conflict with the law. In October 2010, the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women recommended
withdrawing all reservations to the Convention (which was partially done in 2011)
and adopting a strategy aimed at eliminating patriarchal attitudes and discriminatory
stereotypes with respect to women.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2014
Key results
8.
Advocacy, in which UNICEF actively engaged during the transitional period
and which was supported by public institutions, associations, the media and
parliamentarians, led to adding to the new Constitution an article reaffirming the basic
principles of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and
recognizing that children have rights, that the family and the State are guarantors of
those rights and that children’s best interest must, without any discrimination, guide
any decision related to them. That advocacy also helped to set up an independent
mechanism to monitor the rights of the child. Partnerships have been formed with the
emerging civil society, with training institutes for journalists and with media
regulation authorities to promote respect for the rights of the child.
9.
The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2011-2012 (MICS 4) and the national
Multiple Overlapping Deprivation Analysis (N-MODA) approach provided the first
disaggregated data available since the revolution. They highlighted considerable
social and geographical disparities affecting children and led to policy proposals for
combating child poverty. The results of the evaluation of national plans for the support
of needy families (particularly through education allowances) and of health districts
will serve as a basis for reform proposals concerning social-protection and health
systems. Moreover, teachers have been consulted and planning capacities have been
enhanced in support of education reform.
10. The strategy of targeting activities promoting mother and child health in
disadvantaged regions (particularly in the Centre-West), which has been adopted by
the Ministry of Health and supported by UNICEF since 2000, has been continued,
thanks to specific support in the areas of diagnosis, capacity-building and outreach

4/11

work and has improved the coverage of services. In addition, HIV/AIDS testing
centres have been set up in all regions of the country and a national mother-to-child
transmission prevention (PMTCT) strategy has been launched through four university
centres. The creation of an information system on youth has begun and the
participation of young persons in discussions of policies that concern them has been
encouraged through partnerships between the Ministry of Youth, the National
Observatory on Youth, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Moreover, a
project for the prevention of drug addiction in schools has been launched in
cooperation with the Ministry of Health.
11. Activities in the area of pre-school education have received new stimulus.
Feasibility studies on generalizing the last pre-school year and expanding it in
disadvantaged areas have identified political options that are more egalitarian. The
school inclusion strategy has been revised to ensure the access of disabled children to
ordinary schools, while support is currently made available for the first phase of
implementation of that strategy. The integrated “child-friendly school” model has
been tested and adopted. New impulse has been given to the fight against dropping
out of school, on the basis of studies that have provided insights into the extent,
gender-specific dimension and other characteristics of the phenomenon.
12. In the area of child protection, considerable progress has been made through the
action plan against violence, the enhancement of the capacities of actors and the
establishment of information systems. Thus, 70 per cent of children reported to child
protection staff are assisted in accordance with the law and two thirds of children born
out of wedlock and placed in an institution in 2012 have been integrated as appropriate
or placed with a foster family. A three year programme of support for the improvement
of the juvenile justice system has been launched with European Union support.

Lessons learned
13. Since the mid-term review and thanks to opportunities created after the
revolution, various evaluations of programmes, reviews, studies and discussion
papers have helped to draw lessons useful for future plans and have kindled partners’
interest in policy and strategy assessments as discussion inputs regarding reforms that
the country intends to launch.
14. Inadequate intra- or intersectoral coordination, extensive centralization and
programme verticality have been identified as cross-cutting constraints. Note has also
been made of insufficient pilot implementation of programmes and of the inadequacy
of information systems in view of the constantly changing situation of children,
particularly those most vulnerable. In-service training of service providers seems to
have a limited and short-lived impact. It should be planned on the basis of partnerships
with universities, should be included in national budgets and should make use of
information technologies. Moreover, it has been observed that children, adolescents,
young persons and parents do not participate in the formulation, implementation and
evaluation of policies and programmes that concern them.
15. Evaluation of the “child protection” component has shown its relevance but has
revealed insufficient targeting, effectiveness and impact in terms of reducing violence
or institutionalization. It has also highlighted the low qua lity of services, the limited
application of care standards regarding children in conflict with the law, the lack of

5/11

legislative measures for child victims, the insufficiency of activities targeting the
family and the lack of information conducive to social change.
16. Analysis of the gender component has shown that relevant concepts are well
understood but gender considerations are inadequately mainstreamed into
programmes. Rapid examination of the education component has confirmed the
relevance of support for national plans aimed at equity but has revealed their limited
effectiveness. Such reviews have underscored the need for creating partnerships with
civil society, parents, communities, the media and organizations for the defence of the
rights of children and women in order to strengthen advocacy of equity, gender
equality and fair treatment of vulnerable groups.
17. Support has been provided for evaluations and discussions regarding such
national plans as the national programme for the development of he alth districts
(PNDCS) and the programme for social activities for schools (PASS). Such reviews
have revealed the inadequate implementation of recommendations set forth in earlier
evaluations, pointed to a context currently more conducive to eliminating co nstraints,
and recognized the relevance, variable effectiveness and weak sustainability of the
programmes in question.
18. Lessons have also been drawn from the response to the 2011 massive influx of
migrants (including families) at the Libyan border. That emergency highlighted the need
for better preparation for such crises and disasters, readjustment of existing national
systems so as to handle emergencies and enhancement of the population’s resilience.

Country programme, 2015-2019
Summary budget table
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Equitable social and health policies

1 350

700

2 050

Quality education for all children

1 200

2 300

3 500

Protection of children and adolescents

1 200

1 800

3 000

790

200

990

4 540

5 000

9 540

Intersectoral component
Total

Preparation process
19. This programme has been prepared on the basis of discussions held since the
2010 mid-term review and of the recommendation to adapt the programme to the
situation of Tunisia, as a medium-income country with considerable human
development and a high capacity to ensure its own development. In that framework,
account has been taken of challenges and opportunities resulting from the national
context in the wake of the revolution and identified in the observations of human
rights treaty bodies and in recent studies, surveys and evaluations.
20. The above discussion benefited also from broad consultations with the partners
in late 2013. In those consultations, the situation in each area was examined on the
basis of an analysis of relevant determinants, which aimed at identifying key

6/11

bottlenecks and obstacles impeding the attainment of outcomes fair to children and
the adoption of priorities for action.

Programme components, key expected results and strategies
21. The programme is based on a vision guided by equality and justice and aimed
at ensuring that all children and adolescents, regardless of gender, have access to the
same rights. Its goal is to contribute to improving access of the poorest and most
vulnerable children, particularly in the most disadvantaged regions, to effective social
protection and to quality health, education and welfare services, and to promoting
their participation in all activities. Programme components have been selected to
respond as strategically as possible to the main disparities affecting children, by
eliminating the bottlenecks identified.
Component entitled “Equitable social and health policies”
22. This component addresses common obstacles identified in order to create an
environment conducive to reducing deprivation and disparities affecting children. It
aims at ensuring that social reforms target, as a matter of priority and regardless of
gender, the most vulnerable children and adolescents and that their rights are
addressed more effectively in national, regional and local policies, strategies and
programmes of development, through the three major contributions described below.
23. First, the processes of reforming the social protection system and the social
sectors will be supported by advocacy of the new economic de velopment plan, the
sectoral policies and the national plan for children as means for addressing the rights of
the child and equity issues. To that end, the programme will require innovative
methodological tools developed during the last period (inter alia, N-MODA, child
impact analyses and social budgeting) and rely on experience acquired in other
countries in the framework of South-South cooperation. Discussion on financing
social protection and policies for children and on the impact of tax reform and
subsidies on children will be central to this component.
24. Second, the national decentralization process will be supported through the
establishment of mechanisms for analysing constraints and identifying appropriate
solutions at the local level. In that context, certain targeted regions will be assisted at
the levels of strategic planning, monitoring and participatory evaluation of the social
sectors. In order to eliminate obstacles to the use of social services and to the adoption
of social standards and types of behaviour favourable to the survival, development
and protection of children, decentralized models for following up on outcomes as
regards equity and the gender perspective will be tested. In the area of health,
emphasis will be placed on the integration of programmes and services which target
mothers, children and adolescents and include activities for HIV/AIDS prevention
and nutrition improvement. Special attention will be paid to setting up early warning
systems to avert risks, disasters and vulnerabilities that affect children. The
programmes will support initiatives for strengthening the resilience of communities.
25. Third, the participation of children, adolescents and young persons, regardless
of gender, will be promoted and mainstreamed into the development process through
capacity-building for them and the other stakeholders. In that framework, those
groups will be encouraged to participate in the development, monitoring and
evaluation of policies and strategies that concern them.

7/11

26. The main partners in implementing and following up on this component will be the
Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministries of Planning, Social Affairs, Youth, the Family
and Children, Finance and Health, civil society organizations, local authorities, the media,
academic and research institutions and international organizations.
Component entitled “Quality education for all children”
27. This component aims at reforming the education system with a view to making
it more equitable, inclusive and effective, in the context of democratic transition
characterized by strong social demand. The component comprises the three
sub-components described below.
28. The first sub-component concerns early childhood education and consists in
formulation, monitoring and evaluation of the strategy for generalizing the
pre-school year and establishing public and community kindergartens in the poorest
areas. These aims will be achieved through advocacy, capacity-building, knowledge
management and exchange of experience.
29. The second sub-component will promote support for mainstreaming the new
strategy against dropping out of school and elementary school failure into the reform
process on the basis of recent studies in order to implement innovative regional and
gender-specific procedures focused on children and adolescents. Such support will
consist in training national and regional executives, introducing decentralized
mechanisms to follow up on outcomes and supporting pupils in difficulty in
disadvantaged establishments and areas.
30. The third sub-component will consist in supporting educational system reform,
aimed at improving quality and equity, through the creation of governance authorities
and monitoring and evaluation entities, the enhancement of the capacities of
stakeholders, advocacy and technical assistance in introducing special programmes
(school inclusion of disabled children, priority education or social activities for
schools), and the adoption of strategies for civic education or the prevention of school
violence and drug addiction. The participation of all pupils, regardless of gender, and
other education stakeholders will be actively encouraged.
31. Education component implementation partners will be the Ministry of Education
and institutions supervised by it, the Ministries of Social Affairs and the Family, and other
partners, such as regional delegations, local authorities, academic and research institutions,
civil society organizations and technical and financial partners (TFPs).
Component entitled “Child and adolescent protection”
32. This component aims at strengthening the system for the protection of boys and
girls against violence, abuse, exploitation and negligence, through improved and
equitable prevention and other appropriate measures. The compone nt comprises the
three sub-components described below.
33. The first sub-component concerns support at the level of legal standards,
policies and the protection system through the adoption of a national strategy for the
protection of children that is gender-sensitive and aims at more effective targeting of
children victims of violence, mistreatment, abuse or exploitation; the updating and
operational implementation of the national plan for combating violence against
children; and strengthening information systems to ensure more effective rapid
response. Emphasis will be given to networking and improved coordination among

8/11

services (stressing the mobilization of the health and education sectors), with a focus
on prevention and rehabilitation of child victims, regardless of gender.
34. The second sub-component concerns protection services. Institutionalization will be
reduced in favour of placement with a family, support for biological families, family
rehabilitation and development of programmes for assisting de-institutionalized children.
Building the capacities of professional staff, implementing such alternatives to
detention as release under supervision, and promoting social and family reintegration
of all children, regardless of gender, will ensure that the professionals concerned will
apply the legislation more appropriately to children in contact with the law and that
such children are protected more effectively.
35. The third sub-component concerns social change. Studies on family educational
practices, particularly from a gender perspective, and advocacy of social and
behavioural change will lead to improved practices on the part of families and
professionals and will help to combat discrimination against vulnerable children.
36. The main partners will be the Ministries of the Family, Justice, Social Affairs,
Security, Health, Education and Vocational Training, and Employment, civil society
organizations and the media. Consideration will be given to other innovative
partnerships with parliament and with academic, research and training institutions.
Intersectoral component
37. Cross-cutting advocacy strategies based on factual data, knowledge
management, South-South or triangular cooperation, and promotion of innovation
will support the programme as a whole and will be supplemented with promotion of
the participation of children and adolescents and with advocacy of social and
behavioural change towards respect for the rights of children and gender equality. In
each component, attention will be paid to children with disabilities. The intersectoral
component will serve as support for all of the other components.

Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
38. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) is based on
the following three main pillars of development in Tunisia:
(a)

Democratic governance;

(b)

An inclusive, sustainable and resilient economic model;

(c) Social protection and equal access to quality social services. The action
described above is part of the third pillar and is related to the other two.
39. In the absence of a development plan, national priorities are established in
national budgets and processes based on a broad national consensus, such as the social
contract signed in early 2013 by social partners and the G overnment.

9/11

Relationship to national priorities
40. Tunisia has progressed towards achieving the MDGs and has attained most of the
targets to be reached by 2015. A joint effort on the part of United Nations a gencies is
required in order to eliminate lags in connection with MDG 5 and MDG 6.
41. The country programme is designed to address multisectoral problems and gives
priority to three outcomes of the strategic plan of UNICEF for the period 2014 -2017:
social inclusion, education and protection. It is b ased on the observations of human
rights treaty bodies, particularly the concluding observations formulated by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2010 and requiring a response from the
country during the next period.

Major partnerships
42. In this programme, the Government and UNICEF will accord priority to the
creation of partnerships between the public and private sectors, civil society, the
media and international organizations in order to promote the rights of all children in
Tunisia.
43. Cooperation with academic and research institutions will aim at sharing
knowledge on children, promoting institutionalized training and identifying
innovative approaches. Partnerships will be sought with NGOs in order to build their
capacity to support vulnerable children, with the private sector in view of its social
responsibility, and with the media in order to enhance their programming capacities
and ethical role with respect to the child and promote children’s participation in media
production.
44. Partnerships with international organizations will be established in order to
create synergies within the framework of the various components. Partnerships with
the World Bank and the European Union will be strengthened. In order to ensure
consistency among agencies of the United Nations system, there are plans for joint
programmes, particularly in the areas of maternal health and young persons. South South cooperation will be conducive to experience sharing and bilateral or triangular
inter-agency collaboration. Increased attention will be paid to partnerships with
organizations specializing in gender issues in order to encourage girls’ and women’s
empowerment and mainstream gender considerations into all programme components.

Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. Monitoring and evaluation will help to assess progress, constraints and
challenges through equity- and gender-sensitive information systems within partner
institutions. Monitoring and evaluation will rely on collecting disaggrega ted data and
building national and regional capacities in data analysis and use, particularly at the
decentralized level, through tools for following up outcomes as regards equity.
46. Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms of the country programme will be
similar to those set up within the UNDAF. Support will be provided for carrying out
such surveys as the MICS on progress achieved during the period. Lastly, evaluations
of programme components and a gender-specific analysis will be conducted in that
interval.

10/11

47. Activities will be monitored through cooperation between UNICEF and national
partners, civil society, beneficiary communities and children, adolescents and young
persons, regardless of gender, by means of visits on the ground, identification of
experiences, and verification procedures provided for within the framework of the
harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT). Coordination will be ensured through
participation in thematic or multi-party coordination groups.

11/11

