E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
18 May 2015
Original: English
French
Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Annual session 2015
16-19 June 2015
Item 5 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document
Turkmenistan
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Turkmenistan is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $ 4,500,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $ 5,500,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by the Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks prior to the annual session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/4.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Programme rationale
1. Turkmenistan, an upper-middle-income country, has experienced sustained economic
growth for over a decade, which resulted in greater fiscal space available for social
development and for improving children’s health, education and social protection. The
Government is undertaking socio-economic reforms to improve living standards for all,
providing a wide range of goods and services to the population, free of charge or at negligible
cost. Social allowances have increased by up to 40-50 per cent since 2010. In total, 417,000
households (nearly 45 per cent of all households) received childcare allowances in 2012.
According to the State Statistics Committee (SSC), more than 12,100 children up to age 16
received disability allowances in 2012. However, the impact of socio-economic progress has
been uneven across the country: disparities persist, by rural-urban status, region, wealth
quintile, gender and disability.
2. The Government has recently been commended for its willingness to strengthen its
human rights record.1 Turkmenistan has continued to ratify human rights instruments, and
made considerable efforts to harmonize its legislation with international child rights
standards. The country is a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
first two Optional Protocols,2 to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, and to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. In 2015, Turkmenistan presented its combined second,
third and fourth reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, as well as the initial
report on implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
3. Turkmenistan has made progress toward creating an enabling environment for children,
enacting new laws on Trafficking and Selling of People, Equality of Women, Education and
Youth, and the Law on Child Rights Guarantees. In addition, the government has adopted
several Codes governing child protection, including the Family Code and a new version of
the Social Protection Code, which brought the age of marriage in line with that of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, and the
Labour Code were also updated so that they would align with recommendations made by
treaty bodies. A National Action Plan for Children is pending approval. The 2012 National
Juvenile Justice Programme provides for juvenile justice processes that are more childfriendly. The processes, compliant with international child rights obligations, cover the
prevention, rehabilitation and reintegration of juvenile offenders into communities, as well
as the provision of welfare and rehabilitation services to children in juvenile detention
facilities. At the same time they enhance coordination and monitoring systems.
4. Also important for the new country programme of cooperation are the National Early
Childhood Development and School Readiness Programme 2011-2015, the National
Nutrition Programme and Action Plan 2012-2016, the National HIV Programme 2012-2016,
and the 2015-2019 National Strategy and Action Plan on Maternal, Neonatal, Child, and
Adolescent Health.
5. The National Early Childhood Development Programme, designed with UNICEF
support, aims to improve the quality of health and education services for children aged 0-8,
promote supportive parenting, increase the readiness of girls and boys for schooling, and
strengthen the monitoring of progress towards these objectives. A determinant analysis with
partners revealed that several bottlenecks had to be overcome for successful implementation
1
2

2/17

Human Rights Council (2013).
Turkmenistan has yet to ratify the third Optional Protocol, on a communications procedure.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

of this programme. The following was needed: better integration across policies; more
coordinated planning for young children among the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry,
the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Labour and Social Protection; improved quality
of information systems and data across sectors; and strengthened national capacity to
translate policy into practice.
6. Health services for children are widely available and accessible in the country.
However, child mortality remains high: while the Government reported an infant mortality
rate of 15 per 1,000 live births in 2011, the United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child
Mortality Estimation (UNIGME) estimated the rate at 50 for the same year, and 47 for 2013.3
Neonatal conditions (pneumonia, asphyxia, preterm birth and sepsis) continue to be among
the main causes of infant mortality.4 Total public expenditure on health was only 2 per cent5
of gross domestic product in 2012, much less than in other countries of the region with similar
economic development. Other areas for improvement are the knowledge and skills of medical
staff, the quality of maternal and child care in health facilities, as well as the awareness of
parents about important childcare practices. Turkmenistan is one of 60 countries in the
Countdown to 2015 initiative to track maternal, newborn and child survival. A stronger focus
on survival, health, nutrition and development is required, especially for remote and most
disadvantaged populations.
7. Turkmenistan achieved universal salt iodization in 2004. UNICEF supports the
Government in monitoring sustainability in this area. In addition, flour fortification is owned
and fully financed by the Government, with UNICEF supporting its quality assurance.
National efforts to address stunting, anaemia and vitamin A deficiency, however, have yet to
yield results, especially in the most disadvantaged areas. Anaemia remains a serious public
health issue, affecting 44 per cent of children 6-59 months old and 57 per cent of women of
reproductive age. One in two children aged 6-59 months has vitamin A deficiency, which
contributes to both child morbidity and mortality.6
8. In 2013, the number of years of compulsory education was increased from 10 to 12,
with children entering school at age 6. According to the Ministry of Education, one in three
children aged 3-5 was enrolled in kindergarten in 2013. As many as 81 per cent of preschools
were located in urban areas, which tend to be more advantaged than rural areas. The Ministry
is building new kindergartens, particularly in rural areas, to widen access to preschool
education. UNICEF supports the establishment of inclusive alternatives in remote
communities, such as Early Childhood Development centres, and helps to strengthen the
capacity of parents to prepare their children for school through a network of counselling
centres.
9. For children with disabilities, several types of preschool services exist: special
kindergartens or integrated groups in ‘regular’ kindergartens for children with hearing and
visual impairments, speech difficulties, intellectual disabilities, and disorders of the
musculoskeletal system.7 In 2013, the Ministry made a significant effort to expand the access
of 5-year-old girls and boys to pre-primary school readiness programmes. A review of the
experience so far identified key determinants of success in pre-primary education that will
3
4
5
6
7

UNIGME, Child Mortality estimates for 2012 and 2014.
“Countdown to 2015: Maternal, Newborn and Child Survival report” (Turkmenistan, 2014)
World Bank, World Development Indicators (2014).
UNICEF Turkmenistan, National Nutrition Survey (2012).
Turkmenistan, Initial State party report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child (2005).

3/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

need to be prioritized: policy guidance and regulatory frameworks, as well as providing
teachers with strong skills enabling them to help to equalize learning opportunities and to
support the social, emotional and cognitive development of children with disabilities.
10. At 97 per cent (2011), primary school enrolment8 is very high, as are retention and
completion rates for both boys and girls. Yet considerable barriers remain to achieving
international standards of quality primary education: these include, especially, policy gaps
and a dearth of trained teachers. One initiative to improve both quality and inclusiveness is
Child-Friendly Schools (CFS). More than 100 schools already use the CFS certification
package, which includes a comprehensive set of standards, indicators and school-based
assessments. Despite these efforts to promote inclusive education, segregation of children
with disabilities persists. One major challenge is that there are no data on the number of girls
and boys with disabilities and on the numbers of children with disabilities attending
mainstream schools.
11. The issue of disability is becoming more visible in Turkmenistan. Still, children with
disabilities face unequal opportunities to develop to their full potential. Considerable barriers
prevent them from accessing services tailored to their needs and mainstream education and
learning. Moreover, these children commonly suffer from formal institutionalization or
“institutionalization at home”. Children with disabilities, who comprise less than 5 per cent
of the general population, are overrepresented in the infant home population, where they
make up 36 per cent of residents.9 Often, this institutionalization begins from birth. A recent
study,10 for example, found that over half of 189 very young children who were residents in
four infant homes in September 2013 had been sent directly from maternity hospitals.
Institutionalization is due to a number of factors, including social stigma, discrimination,
inadequate services ̶ which tend to segregate children with disabilities ̶ lack of appropriate
support in the community, physical challenges and the use of a medical model to assess
disabilities, rather than the bio-psychosocial model based on the International Classification
of Functioning, Disability and Health of the World Health Organization.
12. Despite a notable increase in research and surveys on children with disabilities and
other issues, including efforts undertaken with international cooperation, Turkmenistan has
yet to establish an adequate data collection system that would allow disaggregation and
analysis of the various areas of child rights, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child in its 2015 Concluding Observations.
13. Turkmenistan is extremely vulnerable to earthquakes, drought, flash floods, mudslides,
strong winds, sand storms, and hail. Ashgabat City in 1948 was destroyed by an earthquake,
which killed an estimated 176,000 people. Disaster preparedness and risk reduction focus on
the paramount concern of safe and disaster-sensitive infrastructure.

Programme priorities and partnerships
14. Lessons learned supported by national research11 point to areas that require further
efforts: harmonizing laws, policies and national action plans, both internally and with
international normative instruments; strengthening national systems capacity in
implementation of laws and programmes benefiting children; supporting the greater

8
9
10
11

4/17

United Nations Turkmenistan, Data assessment for the Millennium Development Goals Report (2014).
Ibid.
UNICEF Turkmenistan, Study on Preventing Institutionalization of Children Aged 0-3 Years (2014).
United Nations, Common Country Assessment for Turkmenistan (Ashgabat, 2013).

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

availability and use of quality data in decision-making, as well as developing reliable systems
to monitor progress towards achieving national goals for children.
15. The goal of the programme of cooperation is to support the Government to accelerate
the universal realization of child rights through aligning its legal framework, policies and
practices for children with international standards and best practices. In keeping with
principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, the rights of young children and children with disabilities to
survive, develop, be protected and participate will be central. The partnership will strive to
strengthen accountability mechanisms, raise awareness about child rights, and improve data
collection and analysis, leading to better national planning and budgeting. It is expected that
the Government will continue to increase its investments in programmes benefiting children
and this programme of cooperation will assist in identifying the most urgent priorities in
reducing equity gaps for children.
16. Aligned with the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017, the country programme will
address key bottlenecks in the realization of children’s rights to quality inclusive health,
education and family life by focusing on the following strategies: (a) mainstreaming the best
interests of the child into national policies and practices; (b) facilitating a shift in social norms
and a change in attitudes, values and behaviours affecting the lives of vulnerable children;
(c) developing sector strategies related to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other human rights treaty
obligations; (d) supporting the translation of policies into concrete actions through the
introduction of tailored, replicable, inclusive and Government-funded social services and
programmes, in particular, for vulnerable children and families; (e) sharing best practices on
effective ways to close equity gaps and achieve gender equality; and (f) building partnerships
with social sectors, Parliament and civil society around the children’s equity agenda.
17. The country programme is guided by national priorities for children embodied in the
legal and policy framework for children’s rights. In addition to the new laws and codes
mentioned above, this framework includes the National Programme for Socio-economic
Development (NPSD) 2011-2030, and National Programme on Development of Social and
Living Conditions of Residents of Villages, Communities, Towns and Regional Centres
(NPDSLC) 2010-2020. The country programme also contributes to the five-year
development programmes for each social sector, the comprehensive Education Sector
Reform and the National Action Plan for Children. The country programme’s strategic intent
is aligned with the post-2015 sustainable development agenda and will contribute to
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
18. Greater attention needs to be paid to the quality of health and education services,
especially for children with disabilities and their families. In child protection, more progress
is needed regarding children in institutions and children with disabilities. The evaluation of
the CFS initiative12 highlighted that inclusion of children with disabilities in mainstream
education and improving education quality in Turkmenistan require much work in order to
meet international standards, norms and commitments.
19. The country programme of cooperation will focus on supporting public policies and
systems that will benefit children in institutions and at the same time engage civil society on
issues that are not yet well publicized: violence, abuse and neglect at home, in the school and
within the community. The programme will strive to build independent complaint
12

Karen Munce, “Turkmenistan Child Friendly-School Initiative: Evaluation report” (Government of
Turkmenistan and UNICEF, 2014).

5/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

mechanisms and child rights monitoring. The child protection system will strengthen its
capacity for assessment, prevention and monitoring. The treatment of children in conflict
with the law, especially those in pre-trial and penal detention, will be brought in line with
international practice.13 Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) will remain a national priority and
will include nationwide school safety assessment.
20. The programme of cooperation encompasses four strategic components, which are
interconnected: (a) young child survival and well-being, (b) quality and inclusive early
learning, (c) reducing social inequities, and (d) partnerships for child rights. The
programme’s main thrust – “equity from the start” – will require work across government
systems to ensure quality and continuity of services. It will support policies and practices that
promote health, responsive parenting, and early learning and development starting from birth
and extending through the transition to school. It will help national partners to develop and
strengthen inclusive and targeted services (such as early intervention and developmental
paediatrics for children with disabilities) by integrating these services into existing
healthcare, education and social protection systems.
21. The programme will contribute to building appropriate linkages and referrals among
public administration systems and support the development of multi-disciplinary professional
expertise in early childhood health, care and development, in early learning, and in child
protection. To achieve this the programme will contribute to helping government sectors to
work in a more coordinated manner and to share responsibility for common results.
Therefore, the four components of the Country Programme are interconnected and have a
special focus on young children and children with disabilities.
Young child survival and well-being
22. Based on the results of the previous programme of cooperation, this component will
contribute to increasing equitable access to quality health care services, establishing a system
to identify and respond to risks of developmental delays and disabilities in children, and
ensuring a continuum of care for children and their families, especially for children living in
remote rural areas and children with developmental difficulties and disabilities. Impact
results are expected in terms of a reduction in infant mortality.
23. To work towards the avoidance of preventable deaths in early childhood, the
programme will address equity gaps in quality of care by strengthening management
capacities and quality improvement mechanisms, with particular focus on perinatal/neonatal
care services. An assessment by UNICEF and the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry
showed that the home visitation system can be effective in providing a universal package of
health promotion and prevention services to all pregnant women and families with young
children, and ensure a continuum of care from pre-pregnancy through the first three years of
a young child’s life. Primary healthcare services, including home visitation/outreach
programmes, will be optimized as an important channel to promote better parenting
knowledge and skills, with a strong focus on essential care during pregnancy and childcare,
adequate nutrition, and young child survival, health, growth and development.
24. The programme will contribute to addressing malnutrition through promoting exclusive
breastfeeding and timely and age-appropriate complementary feeding practices. By
promoting micronutrient fortification and supplementation programmes, this component will
strengthen the health system’s capacity for service delivery at the primary health care level
13

6/17

UNICEF Turkmenistan, Study on Strengthening the Social Protection System for Children (2013)

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

and community-based care for the prevention of malnutrition in children, especially vitamin
A deficiency and anaemia.
25. The programme component will aim to help partners to fill equity gaps in services that
identify children whose well-being is at significant risk of developmental delays. It will
support the introduction of developmental paediatrics and early intervention services into the
health system, linking these services to education and social protection services. It will help
to build national capacity for early identification, assessment, and planning, monitoring and
multi-disciplinary cooperation. This will include the introduction of the International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health for Children and Youth.
26. Through work with partners, the programme will aim to ensure effective vaccine
management to sustain high immunization rates as well as to introduce new vaccines.
UNICEF will offer procurement services for Government-funded vaccines.
Quality and inclusive early learning
27. This component will promote access to, and quality of, early learning for all children
by supporting the efforts of the Ministry of Education to expand child-friendly principles to
preschool and primary education and learning. This will include designing standards to
ensure the inclusion of children with disabilities, child-centred and participatory learning
environments, application of relevant, play-based and age-appropriate teaching methods, as
well as the implementation and monitoring of standards. In line with the goal of establishing
the National ECD Programme, this component will support modelling of innovative and
replicable forms of inclusive preschool and pre-primary education and learning. It will
contribute to the development of school readiness standards, the updating of preschool and
pre-primary curricula, the establishment of teacher qualification requirements, and to the
design of child-friendly guidelines for comprehensive assessments of early learning
achievements and school readiness.
28. The component will elaborate national policy on inclusive education in line with the
inclusive education road map developed in 2014. It will help to design a capacity-building
strategy to equip preschool and primary school teachers with competencies and skills to
deliver inclusive education, and will update the training curricula for teachers through the
introduction of flexible teaching and learning methods adapted to different needs and learning
styles. UNICEF will support the Ministry of Education to generate data on children with
disabilities and their participation in mainstream education, and will continue the dialogue
begun with partners on inclusion of all children in education. Communication for social
change will address segregation-based attitudes and beliefs and promote a wider societal
acceptance of children with disabilities.
29. The programme will also foster preparedness through the scaling up of successful
disaster risk reduction programmatic interventions to preschools and schools, with a focus on
safe and disaster-sensitive infrastructure, accessibility of schools and classrooms, and
developing the capacity of management, teachers, children and parents through life-saving
knowledge and skills.

7/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Reducing social inequities
30. This component seeks to promote the right of children to live without violence, abuse
and neglect and thrive in a safe and nurturing family environment. Building on research 14
that identified equity gaps in the provision of social protection, the programme will support
the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of
Labour and Social Protection to coordinate their efforts in strengthening families in their
childcare roles, and enhancing access to essential and support services for the most vulnerable
children, with a special focus on children with disabilities. The programme will address
underlying gaps and bottlenecks by fostering social work expertise and incorporating child
protective standards in health and education. The programme will review existing regulatory
frameworks, legal acts, policies and budgets with the aim of increasing national investment
in support of vulnerable children. It will also assist the State Statistics Committee and line
ministries to collect and analyse disaggregated data on children with disabilities.
31. As an alternative to segregation and institutionalization, including ‘silent
institutionalization’ of children with disabilities at home, the programme will establish
support services for disadvantaged children and their families; community-based support
services that deal with violence, abuse, and neglect; and referral systems and services to
ensure that social sectors address age- and gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities of
children. At the same time, the programme will enhance the knowledge and skills of existing
health, education and social workers in line with standards to be established, so as to fill the
gap in provision of services for disadvantaged populations, including children with
disabilities, children at risk of institutionalization and children in conflict with the law.
32. The establishment of child and family support services will require addressing policy
gaps. Efforts, therefore, will be made to work with partners in developing the following:
regulations to guide the delivery of these new services; amendments to existing laws on
health, education; and new laws and policies on the rights of persons with disabilities, with a
focus on children. In line with recent policy consultations on the realization of the rights of
children with disabilities,15 the programme will incorporate and translate into action the
definition of disability put forth in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The programme will assess the current child protection system, including roles and
accountabilities of concerned public agencies in the realization and monitoring of child
rights. UNICEF will facilitate access to the best international knowledge and practice for
children, convening stakeholders and fostering dialogue about child protection and social
protection systems for disadvantaged children and their families.
33. To monitor and identify systemic, cultural and attitudinal bottlenecks limiting the
opportunities of vulnerable children, in particular children with disabilities, the programme
will enhance the capacity of statistical, health, education and social protection agencies to
monitor and report in a transparent manner on child rights and on the recommendations and
concluding observations of relevant treaty bodies. It will strengthen the collection of
disaggregated data, aligning efforts with global standards on data access and dissemination.

14

15

8/17

UNICEF Turkmenistan, Studies on Preventing Institutionalization of Children 0-3 Years of Age and on Impact
of Cash, Non-Cash Transfers and Benefit Programmes for Families with Children (2014).
Policy consultation with line ministries, civil society, academia and international experts on recommendations on
the rights of children with disabilities, Turkmenistan (2012).

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Partnerships for child rights
34. The component will focus on promoting effective partnerships with multilateral, public
and non-State actors. Building on well-established cooperation with the Government,
UNICEF will forge stronger cooperation with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of
Economy and Development to leverage more public investment for children. The programme
will also seek greater engagement of civil society in child rights promotion and realization.
Partnerships will be strengthened with knowledge institutions, academia and education
institutions for knowledge production and exchange, both inside the country and beyond its
borders. Cooperation will be further explored to find effective modalities for knowledge
exchange with other countries pursuing results for children.
35. The programme will enhance cooperation with resident and non-resident United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes to achieve joint results under the Partnership
Framework for Development 2016-2020, and will seek new ways to collaborate with the
European Union in inclusive education; advocate with the Word Bank on child-centred public
finance management; and collaborate with the United States Agency for International
Development and the Turkish International Cooperation Agency in decreasing IMR.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Young child survival and well-being

1 100

1 700

2 800

Quality and inclusive early learning

1 100

1 700

2 800

Reducing social inequities

1 600

2 100

3 700

700

0

700

4 500

5 500

10 000

Partnerships for child rights
Total

Programme and risk management
36. This CPD outlines UNICEF contributions to national results and serves as the primary
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to
the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s
programme and operations policies and procedures.
37. During programme implementation, the country office will aim to verify the UNICEF
Theory of Change hypotheses and related assumptions through regular programme reviews
and the application of results-based management. The identified risks that could endanger
the achievement of programme results will be monitored, and mitigation measures
implemented. The programme will also have a specific component – DRR – as one of the
cost-effective development interventions to save and protect lives of children in times of
natural disasters.

9/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Monitoring and evaluation
38. The programme will measure progress in the realization of child rights, emphasizing
disadvantaged groups, including children with disabilities, and gender disparities. The
successful practice of participatory research will continue to strengthen national capacity in
data collection, analysis and response actions. A special focus will be on the comparability
of national and internationally validated data and on the quality, accessibility and use of data.
This will be achieved through innovative data collection and quality management tools to
assess results of the programme of cooperation. Particular attention will paid to following up
on the analysis of the data from 2014-2015 studies on the situation of children with
disabilities and on services that respond to their needs. The programme will thus contribute
to addressing current gaps in the availability of data on child rights in Turkmenistan.
39. Two joint evaluations will be undertaken to track progress on two programme
components: (a) effectiveness of home visiting, which will also assess progress in the
implementation of the national policy on neonatal, child and adolescent health, and (b) the
access of young children, including children with disabilities, to quality early learning, which
will contribute to tracking progress related to the national policy on ECD and school
readiness.

10/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Annex
Results and resources framework
Government of Turkmenistan -UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 36, 39, 40
National priorities: SDGs 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 17, Turkmenistan’s Constitution, Law on Guarantees of the Rights of the Child (2014), National Strategic Plan for
Turkmenistan (2011-2030), National Programme on Development of Social and Living Conditions of Residents of Villages, Communities, Towns and
Regional Centres (2010-2020), National Plan of Action for Children (2016-2020), National Strategy and Action Plan on Maternal, Newborn, Child and
Adolescent Health (2015-2019), National Programme on ECD and School Readiness (2011-2015), National Nutrition Programme and Action Plan (20122016), National HIV Programme (2012-2016)
United Nations Partnership Framework for Development outcomes involving UNICEF:
1. Quality data, aligned with international standards, is available to policy makers, legislators, and the interested public to monitor the major goals
of National Programmes, the post-2015 SDGs, United Nations Partnership Framework for Development, and to formulate new national strategies
and programmes
Indicators
1.1. % of the recommendations from the adapted Global Assessment of the National Statistical System implemented
1.2. Number of sectors that have developed sector plans and established a system to monitor progress
1.3. SDG targets adopted and incorporated into national strategies and sector plans
1.4. Availability of a nationalized SDG monitoring and reporting system in keeping with international standards
2. Preschool, primary and secondary education services are of higher quality, in line with international standards, and with priority given to
inclusive education
Indicators
2.1. % of five year old girls and boys enroled in pre-primary education
2.2. % of secondary (including primary) schools that implement quality and inclusive education standards
2.4. Availability of gender- and age-disaggregated data to track access to education of girls and boys, including children with disabilities (CWD)
3. The social protection system is ready to provide inclusive quality communitybased support services
Indicators
3.1. Coverage of social protection systems, disaggregated by sex, age, rural/urban and at-risk groups
3.2. Availability of inclusive community-based support services compliant with international standards
3.3. % of population (disaggregated by residence, age, sex, and disability status) with knowledge of where and how to access community-based social
services
4. The people of Turkmenistan, especially vulnerable groups, enjoy better coverage of quality health care services focusing on women and child
health, nutrition, non-communicable diseases, tuberculosis and multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis, early detection and prevention (MDRTB)
(*Focus: young children, children with developmental delays, MDRTB patients, young people, pregnant and lactating women, reproductive-age women, and
migrants)

11/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Indicators
4.1. U5 mortality rate by 2020
4.4. % of maternity facilities providing comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care in line with adopted clinical protocols
6. The national policy, legislative and institutional frameworks are responsive to climate change issues by promoting climate resilience, adaptation,
climate risk management and disaster risk reduction measures at sector and community level
Indicators
6.3. Availability of DRR and Climate Risk Management (CRM)/adaptation legal instruments approved and under implementation with appropriate financial
and technical arrangements, and quality sector plans developed and initiated that have DRR/CRM adaptation practices, include gender aspects and
appropriate DRR cross-sector coordination mechanisms included
8. State institutions implement and monitor laws, national programmes and strategies in a participatory manner in line with the country’s human
rights commitments
Indicators
8.1. Number of the new laws and amendments that are gender-sensitive and developed in line with United Nations human rights standards
8.2. Number of human rights national plans approved and percentage of actions implemented
8.3. Number of civil society development bodies representing women, youth, children and persons with disabilities participating in the design and
implementation of national and sector programmes
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014-2017, outcomes: 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 (Health, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, Nutrition, Education, Child
Protection, Social Inclusion)
UNICEF outcomes

Key progress indicators,
baselines and targets

Means of
verification

Indicative country programme
outputs

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

Public health
policy
documents;
regular
monitoring
reports,
including lot
quality assurance
sampling
(LQAS)
collected data

By end-2017, National policy on
early intervention services/
developmental paediatrics and
related clinical protocols adopted
in line with international standards

Ministry of
Health and
Medical Industry
(MoHMI),
sector ministries,
Medical
University,
Medical colleges,
Maternal and
Child Health
Centre, National

Indicative resources by
country programme
outcome (in thousands of
US$)

Young child survival and well-being
1. By end-2020, all
children, including
children with
developmental
difficulties, have
access to quality
health services to
ensure child survival,
health and better
developmental
outcomes

12/17

Indicator: % of maternity
facilities following updated
protocols on neonatal care,
including early
identification of
developmental difficulties
in children, principles of the
Baby-Friendly Hospital
Initiative (BFHI) and
infection prevention
Baseline: 0%, 2015

By end-2019, the health system
regularly assesses implementation
of adopted protocols on neonatal
care, home visiting, infection

RR
1 100

OR
1 700

Total
2 800

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Target: 70%, 2020

Indicator: Proportion of
Primary Health Care
facilities that offer updated
home visiting services
aligned with regional
standards
Baseline: 0%, 2015
Target: 50%, 2020

control and BFHI principles to
ensure quality of care

Regular
monitoring
reports,
including LQAS
collected data

Indicator:% of mothers of KAP survey
children U5 who know and
practice supportive care for
survival, growth and
development
Baseline: TBD, Facts for
Life-based Knowledge,
Attitude and Practice (KAP)
survey, 2015
Target: TBD, to be
measured by KAP, 2019

Inter-agency
Coordination
Committee,
UNICEF, WHO,
UNFPA

By end-2019, evaluation of home
visiting services is conducted to
measure progress against the 2012
baseline assessment

By end-2019, all home visiting
professionals provide parental
education on child health, nutrition
and development to all pregnant
women and families of children
U5

Quality and inclusive early development
2. By end-2020,
young children aged
3-8, including the
most disadvantaged,

Indicator: % of five year
old girls and boys enrolled
in pre-primary education

Reports of
SSC/Ministry of
Education
(MoE)

By end-2017, school readiness
standards, child-friendly
measurement tools and curriculum

MoE, National
Institute of
Education, SSC,

RR
1 100

OR
1 700

Total
2 800

13/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

benefit from
preschool and
primary education

Baseline: 33,5% (54%
boys; 46 girls), State
Statistics Committee (SSC)
2012
Target: 80% for boys and
girls, 2020

local education
authorities

By end-2017, training/retraining
programmes for pre-school,
primary and secondary school
specialists are improved in line
with international quality and
inclusive education standards

Teacher training
colleges and
higher education
establishments,
MoHMI, Ministry
of Finance (MoF),
civil society
organizations
(CSOs)

Indicator: Availability of
child-friendly measurement
tools to assess school
readiness
Baseline: Measurement
tools not available, 2014
Target: measurement tools
available, 2017

MoE
order/regulation
on standards of
school readiness

Indicator: % of schools
meeting international
quality and inclusive
education standards
Baseline: 5.5 %, 2014
Target: 30% , 2020

Reports on
certification of
schools for
Child-Friendly
Schools (CFS)
status

By end-2019, CFS evaluation to
assess implementation of quality
and inclusive standards in primary
education is conducted

Indicator: % of schools
and kindergartens assessed
for compliance with DRR
safety standards
Baseline: (1,800 schools)
None assessed, 2014
Target: 20%, 2020

MoE and school
reports

By end-2017, procedures on
assessment of preschools and
schools are developed and tested
in pilot preschools/schools

Ministry of
Defence, National
Red Crescent
Society, Ministry
of Construction

By end-2020, the Government has
capacity to assess
preschools/schools for safety

Ministry of
Economy and
Development,
MoF, MoHMI,

Baseline: 860
kindergartens, none
assessed, 2014

14/17

for pre-primary learning are ready
for use

By end-2018, new forms of
preschool education services are
modelled in two selected locations,
assessed and documented

By end-2020, the Government has
a national policy on inclusive
education

MoE, National
Institute of
Education, SSC,
local education
authorities,
UNFPA

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

Target: 20%, 2020

local education
authorities

Reducing social inequities
3.1. By end-2020, the
social protection
system is ready to
provide inclusive
quality communitybased support
services

Indicator: Availability of a
conceptual policy
framework on social work
(Y/N)
Baseline: Policy is not
available
Target: An endorsed policy
framework, 2020

Ministry of
Labour and
Social Protection
(MoLSP)
reports,
Journal of
Parliament

By end-2017, a conceptual policy
framework for social services is
developed targeting disadvantaged
groups, including CWD

MoLSP, MoE,
MoHMI, local
executive
authorities, MoF,
CSOs, academia

1 600

2 100

3 700

Programme
reports and
documentation
of social support
services
modelled with
UNICEF support
Indicator: Availability of
inclusive community-based
support services compliant
with international standards
(Y/N)
Baseline: Community
based services are not
available
Target: Services available
in all five velayats
(provinces) capitals and
Ashgabat, 2020

By end-2019, a law on support
services to vulnerable groups of
children and families is developed

Indicator: % of population
(disaggregated by residence,
age, sex, and disability
status) who have knowledge
of where and how to access

By end-2020, social support
services are modeled in 2 selected
locations, assessed, documented

By end-2019, a draft law on a
State social order (contract
arrangement for the delivery of
social services) is drafted

15/17

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

community-based social
services
Baseline: TBD, 2018 KAP
Target: TBD, to be
measured by 2020 KAP
3.2. By end-2020,
state institutions
have strengthened
participatory
systems to
implement and
monitor laws,
national
programmes, and
strategies, including
human rights

Indicator: Availability of
national sex-disaggregated
data on child rights
realization, including data
on CWD
Baseline: 2007 national
report on situation of
children in Turkmenistan
based on 2006 Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey
(MICS)
Target: 2018 and 2020
national reports on situation
of children (including sex
disaggregated data on
CWD)

Reports on
implementation
of National Plan
of Action for
Children
(NPAC), 20162020,
MICS,
Statistical year
books,
Journal of
Parliament

Indicator: Number of new Publication of
laws and amendments that
laws in media
address recommendations
of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
Baseline: 1 (2014 Law on
Guarantees of the Rights of
the Child)
Target: Updated laws on
education and on
healthcare, and a new law
on persons with disabilities
aligned with the Convention

16/17

By end-2017, a system of
indicators to collect and monitor
disaggregated data on child rights
realization to assess NPAC
implementation is developed

National Institute
of Democracy
and Human
Rights, Mejlis,
Ministry of
Justice, MoE,
By end-2018, disaggregated data
SSC,
on CWD is regularly collected and social sector
disseminated to inform alignment ministries, local
of legislation and policy decisions authorities,
in the best interests of CWD
media, local
NGOs

By end-2019, national legislation
is aligned with principles of the
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, focusing on realization of
the rights of CWD (3 laws)

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.8

on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2020
Indicator: Proportion of
schoolchildren 12-16 years
old, disaggregated by sex,
who are aware of and know
about application of child
rights principles, including
the rights of CWD
Baseline: TBD, 2016 KAP
Target: TBD, to be
measured by 2018 KAP

KAP report on
child rights
knowledge
Reports from
consultations
with children on
child rights

By end-2020, awareness of
children, caregivers and decision
makers on child rights is increased
through effective advocacy and
communication

Partnerships for child rights
4. By end-2020,
partnerships are
strengthened with
United Nations
agencies, multilateral
organizations and
the public sector for
greater investment in
the realization of
child rights

Indicator: Size and trend in
public funding for country
programme results areas
benefiting disadvantaged
children
Baseline and Target to be
established 2016

Annual reports
on programme
budget
implementation

The Government increasingly
Government, UN,
incorporates country programme
CSOs,
results areas benefiting
disadvantaged children in midterm
strategic planning and budgeting

Total:

RR
700

OR
0

Total
700

4 500

5 500

10 000

_______

17/17

