Uganda
Country programme document
2010-2014

The draft country programme document for Uganda
(E/ICEF/2009/P/L.27) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2009 second regular session (14-16
September 2009).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2010 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 12 January 2010.

†

Basic data
(2007 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

17.3

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

130

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2006)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2006)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female)
Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

20
440 a
83/82 b
72 b

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

64

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

33

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

5.4

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years olds, 2000-01)

36

GNI per capita (US$)

340

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

64

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

68

†
a

b

More comprehensive data on children and women are available at www.childinfo.org/.
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 550 per 100,000 live births.
Survey data.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Uganda has remained politically stable since the 2006 multi -party elections,
bolstered in 2007 by the end of hostilities in the north, after over two decades of
conflict. The next national elections will be held in 2011. The country’s Peace,
Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), supported by the United Nations, seeks to
address enormous challenges in the 40 conflict-affected districts. Most of the
affected population has returned home despite their lingering security concerns;
children and other vulnerable people remain in camps where they can access
services, but where females especially are at high risk of exploitation.
2.
Uganda ranks 156 out of 179 on the human development index. The country’s
gross domestic product growth is currently around 5 per cent per annum; years of
high growth rates have resulted in a decline in the proportion of the population
living below the poverty line, from 56 per cent in 1992/1993 to 31 per cent in
2005/2006. After a decade of poverty eradication plans, the new National
Development Plan (NDP) will shift emphasis to “growth, employment and
prosperity for all”. There are expectations of large oil revenues in the future, but
currently domestic revenue and public expenditure are insufficient to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. The economy is strained by a 3.2 per cent annual
population growth rate, high commodity prices, climate and environmental
challenges and the current global financial crisis. There are significant income
disparities among regions and population groups. The population still faces
insecurity in parts of the country, and every year crises, such as drought, food
shortages, epidemics, floods and refugees require emergency responses. This
precarious situation indicates the need for a continued strong focus on poverty and

2

disparity reduction, particularly for children and women in the north and the north east.
3.
The proportion of the population unable to meet the recommended food caloric
intake increased from 59 per cent in 1999 to 69 per cent in 2006. Only 25 per cent
of children aged 6 to 23 months receive adequate complementary food. Severe
malnutrition in several areas, especially the north-east, is above the emergency
threshold. Just 42 per cent percent of children are breastfed within one hour of birth
and 60 per cent of children are exclusively breastfed for six months, a decline from
63 per cent in 2001.
4.
The primary net enrolment rate is above 84 per cent, so achievement of the
Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education is possible, but drop out rates are high, as reflected by low completion rate of 51.6 per cent, and the
average quality of education is poor, as reflected by low levels of competency in
literacy (51 per cent in Primary 6) and numeracy (44 per cent in Primary 6).
Enrolment rates are stagnating and completion rates are declining. Only 59 per cent
of children aged 6 in Uganda enter primary school at the required age of 6 and only
50 per cent of pupils completing primary school survive to secondary education.
The Millennium Development Goal target on gender parity in primary school
enrolment was achieved by 2006, but the completion rate for girls is 4 2 per cent,
compared with 55 per cent for boys. Negative influences include high fertility rates
that strain household and government resources; gender inequality; and capacity
gaps in facilities, supplies and human resources.
5.
The under-five mortality rate declined by less than 20 per cent in the past
19 years, and is still far from the Millennium Development Goal target of 56 per
1,000 live births. Children in the poorest quintile have a mortality rate of 172 per
1,000 live births compared to 108 per 1,000 live births for children in the richest
quintile. The infant mortality rate is 76 per 1,000 live births. Full immunization
among children aged 12 to 23 months is only 46 per cent, due to high birth rates and
inadequate funding, planning and mobilization and gaps in the supply chain. Polio
re-emerged in 2009, for the first time in 20 years. The maternal mortality ratio was
estimated at 440 per 100,000 live births in 2006; while the Millennium
Development Goal target is 131 per 100,000 live births. An est imated 94 per cent of
women attend antenatal care at least once, but only 60 per cent in urban areas and
45 per cent in rural areas make the recommended four visits; only 79 per cent in
urban areas and 36 per cent in rural areas deliver in health facilitie s; and only
42 per cent of live births get post-natal care within two days of delivery.
6.
The Millennium Development Goal target on HIV and AIDS was reported as
achieved in the 2007 Uganda Millennium Development Goals report. Yet recent
preliminary data indicates that the adult HIV prevalence rate is likely to be
6.4 per cent (women 7.5 per cent and men 5 per cent). Females remain more likely
than males to be infected, due to economic, cultural and biological vulnerability.
Prevalence peaks at 30 to 34 years for women and at 35 to 39 years for men. Almost
half of all new infections are among married people and those in long -term
relationships. Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) accounts for 18 per cent of all
new infections. Some 39 per cent of people requiring antiretroviral (ARV) treatment
(approximately 156,000) are accessing it; 8 per cent of those on ARV treatment are
children.

3

7.
The Millennium Development Goal targets for malaria and tuberculosis are
achievable. However, malaria remains the biggest killer of children, and reported
incidence of tuberculosis is increasing. Less than 10 per cent of children under five
years and pregnant women sleep under insecticide-treated nets.
8.
The Millennium Development Goal targets on safe drinking water and basic
sanitation are possible to reach with strong efforts. National water coverage has
improved, but only one third of the rural population has access to adequate
sanitation, with variations between districts. Diarrhoeal diseases are a common
cause of childhood illness and death, with periodic outbreaks of typhoid, cholera
and hepatitis E. Major challenges are to achieve widespread community and
household ownership of facilities and to change hygiene practices.
9.
Abduction and recruitment of children into armed conflict has ceased; as of
March 2009 Uganda no longer appears in the list of countries in violation of the
United Nations Security Council resolution 1612. The prevalence rate of female
genital mutilation is less than one per cent. Serious child protect ion challenges
remain: only one in five children is registered at birth; 21 per cent of girls and
7 per cent of boys aged 15-19 years have experienced sexual violence; and 9 per cent
of all children aged 5-17 years are engaged in child labour. Reports of trafficking of
children have been increasing, as have reports of children being murdered for rituals
and of children coming into conflict with the law.
10. The 2008 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child on Uganda’s reports on the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, on the involvement of children in armed conflict and on the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography, precipitated actions to prevent
recruitment of children and reduce child trafficking and sexual exploitation. The
most recent report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women was in 2008. The Ugandan Education Act makes
primary education compulsory and recognizes the importance of ea rly childhood
development and non-formal education. Bills and policies awaiting finalization
include a national birth and death registration policy; a gender and education policy;
an HIV and AIDS Act; and a domestic relations bill that includes a prohibiti on on
adolescent marriage, except for Muslim girls. A ten-year health policy, a school
health policy, a sexual offences bill and a five-year health-sector strategic plan are
currently being developed. Uganda lacks a comprehensive social protection
framework or strategy as well as a comprehensive national disaster risk reduction
and management policy.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2006-20091
Key results achieved
11. School campaigns and recovery programming contributed to a 15 per cent
increase in primary net enrolment in the northern and north -eastern districts, where
__________________
1

4

The current country programme for Uganda (E/ICEF/2005/P/L.2/Rev.1) was originally approved
by the Executive Board for the period 2006-2010. It was shortened by one year so that the new
country programme, to be approved by the Executive Board, would harmonize with the new
NDP of the Government of Uganda, which begins in 2010. Please see paragraph 39.

net enrolment is below the national average. The programme also contributed to
raising completion rates for girls in 18 of the 23 focus districts to above the national
average, from 23 per cent to 40 per cent.
12. The Uganda Child Survival Strategy influenced the setting of priorities for
health interventions in the National Development Plan (NDP). Distribution of over
550,000 long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLITN) greatly increased household
coverage in 2008, from 3 per cent to about 90 per cent in the north -east and from
9 per cent to about 50 per cent in the northern region. National coverage of
households with one LLITN also increased, from 15 per cent in 2004/2005 to
42 per cent in 2007/2008. Over 70 per cent of children under five received treatment
for malaria within 24 hours of onset in nine districts where the UNICEF programme
supported training on community case management and equipping of hea lth
facilities.
13. Water, sanitation and hygiene capacity development contributed to an increase
in access to safe water in schools, from 58 per cent to 70 per cent; a decrease in the
pupil-stance ratio, from 69:1 to 47:1, in programme districts (the nati onal standard
being 40:1); and an increase in the use of improved latrines by households, from
58 per cent to 70 per cent. School health clubs and sanitation campaigns increased
hand washing in schools and health facilities and at home, proving a replicabl e
communication approach.
14. By the end of 2007, approximately 37,000 young people (65 per cent female)
in northern Uganda had been tested for HIV, compared to about 13,000 in 2006.
Male medical circumcision was added to the national prevention agenda. In focus
districts, 65 per cent of pregnant women were tested for HIV (49 per cent in 2007)
and 32 per cent of estimated HIV-positive pregnant women received ARVs to reduce
MTCT (11 per cent in 2007). Guidelines were disseminated on testing at six weeks
of all children born to HIV-positive mothers and on treatment of all HIV-positive
infants less than one year. Three paediatric care and support centres of excellence
were established with Baylor University support.
15. The shift from a humanitarian approach to one focusing on integrated systems
resulted in child protection systems with statutory and community structures
becoming the nationally endorsed model. These models were made operational in
half the sub-counties in 23 focus districts. The programme helped support 88,000
vulnerable children (55 per cent girls) experiencing abuse, violence or exploitation;
some 200,000 children were taught life skills; and 1,489 children engaged in
exploitative and hazardous labour were returned to their families. It also su pported
over 7,000 survivors (90 per cent female) of gender-based violence and helped
2,639 children formerly associated with the Lords Resistance Army to be reunited
with their families. Birth registration was integrated into the sector-wide approach
(SWAp) on justice, law and order, and over 1.3 million births were registered.
Lessons learned
16. UNICEF collaborated successfully with the Government, United Nations
agencies and more than 100 non-governmental partners during the humanitarian
response in Northern Uganda, coordinating the humanitarian clusters in water,
sanitation and hygiene education (WASH), and education as well as the sub -cluster
in child protection. The transition from a humanitarian approach to an emphasis on
development requires a change in partnership strategy, with a shift from service

5

delivery to capacity strengthening, using research and lessons from experience to
generate best practices and evidence for advocacy and scaling-up of high-impact
interventions.
17. The country programme was overextended geographically; although
manifestations of the problems are similar, causes, capacity gaps, partnerships and
vulnerabilities differ dramatically from region to region. An overly vertical
approach reduced both sectoral programme effectiveness and the overall
performance of the country programme. The lesson is to focus on targeted region specific approaches; the new country programme should capitalize on synergies and
integration. The new country programme will be implemented in 13 rather than 23
focus districts. Four intersectoral results management teams will be establish ed to
monitor the implementation.

The country programme, 2010-2014
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Health and nutrition

27 381

47 600

74 981

Water, sanitation and hygiene

19 643

25 480

45 123

Basic education

15 774

16 500

32 274

Child protection

15 714

14 286

30 000

3 857

3 000

6 857

Children and AIDS

15 619

19 400

35 019

Cross-sectoral costs

8 452

8 624

17 076

106 440

134 890

241 330

Social policy and evaluation

Total

Note: Other resources do not include emergency funds, which will be raised when needed.

Preparation process
18. The 2008 midterm review, the programme performance assessment and other
evaluations highlighted achievements, lessons learned and adjustments needed. The
United Nations country team prepared a results-based plan to support the PRDP for
Northern Uganda and a meta-analysis of the causes of the country’s developmental
and humanitarian challenges and capacity gaps. National sectoral reviews, NDP
papers and the evaluation of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan also informed the
country programme preparation. A participatory United Nations Deve lopment
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) preparation process led to the development of a
Vision Statement and three UNDAF outcome areas; UNICEF convenes the social
and protection services area and contributes to the areas on governance and on
sustainable livelihoods and employment. Preparation for the new country
programme included consultations at sectoral, district and community levels,
including with children, and national-level meetings. The results of several audits
led to revisions of the UNDAF and the country programme to better include gender,

6

human rights and environmental considerations, and to harmonize more with the
NDP.
Goals, key results and strategies
19. The overall goal of the UNDAF is to support the capacity of the Government
of Uganda to deliver on the NDP, with a focus on equity and inclusion, peace and
recovery, population and sustainable growth. The overall goal of the UNICEF
country programme is to enable children, especially the most vulnerable, to
progressively realize and sustain their rights to survival, development, protection
and participation.
20.

The programme will follow a number of strategies and approaches:

(a) Apply a gender-sensitive human rights approach wedded to results-based
planning and management, combining participatory, inclusive implementation to
promote sustainability and gender equality with strong monitoring and evaluation of
outputs and outcomes.
(b) Implement selectively, at the national level and in focus districts located
in the northern, north-eastern and west-central regions of Uganda. The selected
districts share the following characteristics: (i) a composite index shows that
children are least likely to be realizing their rights; (ii) UNICEF can add most value,
and be operationally efficient; and (iii) one of three types of challenges prevail:
(1) very disadvantaged, emergency-prone areas; (2) areas recovering from
prolonged conflict; and (3) areas with regular development challenges.
(c) Develop capacity of government monitoring and evaluation systems f or
evidence-based advocacy with the following aims: (i) strengthen the policy
environment and remove bottlenecks; (ii) influence budget and other resource
allocations; (iii) scale up proven high-impact and cost-efficient interventions; and
(iv) ensure the collection of sex disaggregated data.
(d) Use communication for development, encompassing community capacity
development, social mobilization, civil society strengthening and behaviour change
communication, to transform awareness and knowledge into sustai ned behaviour
and social change, with particular emphasis on reducing youth, gender based and
other inequity.
(e) Leverage global knowledge, resources and partnerships and technical
assistance to the national Government and the district governments for in stitutional
and human resource systems strengthening, taking into account gender parity, with a
particular emphasis on procurement and supply chain management, especially for
child survival and development.
(f) Coordinate programmes across sectoral areas, both within UNICEF and
with United Nations or other development partners, with the convergence resulting
in synergy and integration.
(g) Strengthen capacity for disaster risk reduction and for a genderappropriate emergency preparedness and response; directly responding where
necessary, to ensure the Core Commitments for Children in emergencies.

7

Key results
21. Nationally, the percentage of fully immunized children aged 12 -23 months
increases from 46 per cent to 60 per cent; the percentage of childr en under five
sleeping under LLITNs increases from 10 per cent to 40 per cent; and the percentages
of children under five receiving appropriate treatment increases from 37 per cent to
60 per cent for acute respiratory infections; from 51 per cent to 80 per cent for
diarrhoea; and from 60 per cent to 80 per cent for malaria.
22. In focus districts, 80 per cent of children under five receive vitamin A
supplementation and de-worming treatment, and 60 per cent of children with severe
acute malnutrition receive therapeutic feeding and care.
23. Nationally, the percentage of pregnant women and girls making four antenatal
care visits increases from 42 per cent to 70 per cent; the percentage that receives
emergency obstetric care increases from 11 per cent to 20 per cent; and in focus
districts, the percentage of HIV positive pregnant women and girls receiving ARVs
to reduce MTCT increases from 50 per cent to 80 per cent.
24. In focus districts, all primary school girls and boys have access to child friendly water and sanitation facilities in schools; 60 per cent of primary school girls
and boys practice good hygiene (measured as proper and consistent use of latrines
and hand washing with soap after latrine use); and all health centres have
functioning water and sanitation facilities.
25. The percentage of rural households in focus districts that access improved
water sources increases from 54 per cent to 77 per cent, and for sanitation facilities,
from 34 per cent to 80 per cent; also, 80 per cent of girls and boys, a nd their
caregivers, practice good hygiene.
26. The percentage of HIV-positive boys and girls under the age of five receiving
treatment increases from 10 per cent to 50 per cent in focus districts.
27. National and local governments in focus districts effe ctively plan, coordinate,
implement and monitor interventions for all four areas of the Unite for Children,
Unite against AIDS campaign.
28. The percentage of girls and boys that enrol in grade one of primary school at
the age of six increases from 53 per cent to 63 per cent nationally and from 46 per cent
to 56 per cent in focus districts.
29. The percentage of girls and boys who complete their primary education will
increase from 51 per cent to 61 per cent nationally and from 29 per cent to 40 per cent
in focus districts.
30. Nationally, boys and girls at grade three (P3) and grade six (P6) levels increase
their competence in (a) literacy, from 47 per cent to 67 per cent in P3 and from
51 per cent to 76 per cent in P6, and (b) numeracy, from 46 per cent t o 61 per cent
in P3 and from 44 per cent to 59 per cent in P6.
31. In focus districts, justice systems are applying child -friendly and genderresponsive procedures for all girls and boys in conflict with the law to ensure
service and protection according to national and international standards and norms,
in such a way that can be nationally replicated.

8

32. Nationally, the percentage of boys and girls five years old or younger who are
registered and issued birth certificates increases from 21 per cent to 80 per cent.
33. In focus districts, child protection services, capacities, legislation and
regulations are improved and converge into a national child protection system that
ensures adequate and gender-appropriate care and protection of girls and boys
harmed or at risk of exploitation, violence and abuse.
34. Across all programme components, research and evaluation produce evidence
for making human rights-based laws, policies and budgets that affect children, with
emphasis on reducing gender and other disparities.
35. Social protection policies and programmes, including a cash transfer modality,
mitigate the poverty and risk of vulnerable children and women.
36. Ugandan institutions, systems and structures are more effectively applying
participatory communication processes at different levels for behaviour and social
change, allowing for local and cultural contexts, with special emphasis on seven key
family care practices.
37. Government systems are collecting, analysing and using data disaggregated by
sex and age to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of development and
humanitarian interventions, particularly for the most vulnerable, and for reducing
regional, gender and other disparities in claiming rights.
38. Ugandan institutions, systems and structures integrate disaster risk reduction
in development programmes, enhance gender mainstreaming, and prepare and
respond to emergencies in line with the Core Commitments for Children in
Emergencies.
Relation to national priorities and the UNDAF
39. The most recent Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) of the Government
of Uganda expired in July 2008. The Government is currently revising the PEAP
and developing a new five-year NDP for the period 2010 to 2014. In order to
harmonize with the Government’s new NDP, the United Nations country team in
Uganda decided to cut short the current UNDAF by one year and develop a new
UNDAF for 2010-2014. Accordingly, UNICEF decided to terminate the current
country programme of cooperation by the end of 2009 and develop a new five-year
country programme for 2010-2014. Both the UNDAF 2010-2014 and the new
UNICEF country programme were developed to deliver as part of “Delivering as
One” in supporting the achievement of the national priorities and objectives of the
NDP and the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan, as well as the Millennium
Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals in Uganda.
Relation to international priorities
40. The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child embody the guiding principles for the country
programme. In addition, A World Fit for Children, the Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Millennium Declaration and the
Millennium Development Goals, the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness
and the 2008 Accra Agenda for Action, as well as the Hyogo Framework for Action
on disaster risk reduction, have guided programme design, strategies and planned

9

results. Programmes and key result areas correspond to all five focus areas of the
UNICEF medium-term strategic plan. Special emphasis is placed on implementing
the Strategic Framework for Reaching the Millennium Development Goal on Child
Survival in Africa and the Uganda Child Survival Strategy.
Programme components
41. All programme components are aligned with the NDP and the PRDP, and will
support them through SWAps, where applicable. Enhancing programmes for disaster
risk reduction, strengthening capacity for emergency preparedness and response,
and directing response, where necessary, to assure meeting the Core Commitments
for Children in Emergencies, are mainstreamed into all components.
42. The health and nutrition component will be implemented within the
framework of the Health Policy and Health Sector Strategic Plan. It will (a) support
government strategies and programmes on immunization, malaria, acute respiratory
infections, diarrhoea, malnutrition, maternal and newborn health; (b) leverage
resources and partnerships to scale up the response to low coverage of prevention
and treatment services at facility and community levels; (c) enable families to
prevent and manage malaria, diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections, and to adopt
adequate young child feeding, health and hygiene practices through access to
information, skills, resources and commodities; (d) build government capacity to
effectively procure, distribute and manage critical health commodities.
43. The water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) component will (a) support the
Ministry of Water and the Environment, to ensure that national and district level
policies, strategies, budgets and plans, within the SWAp, prioritize increased access
to functional water supply and adequate sanitation facilities at rural schools, health
centres and communities; (b) strengthen national and local capacities for
management, coordination, monitoring and research of WASH activities;
(c) leverage resources and partnerships to scale up investments in cost -effective
approaches and technologies in rural water suppl y, sanitation and hygiene promotion
for vulnerable communities, schools and health facilities; and (d) partner with civil
society and communities for sustained behaviour change, including safe hygiene
practices.
44. The children and AIDS component contributes to the National Strategic Plan
for HIV and AIDS and the joint United Nations programme on HIV and AIDS. It
will (a) support the Government to effectively plan, coordinate, implement and
monitor the response for affected children (around the “Four Ps” of the Unite for
Children, United against AIDS campaign), as part of a social protection strategy for
all highly vulnerable children; (b) strengthen national capacity for resource tracking
and allocation, development of policies and technical guidelines on HIV and AIDS;
and (c) work with partners to improve service delivery, coordination and leveraging
of resources for a scaled-up response to HIV and AIDS, particularly for the
prevention of MTCT and paediatric AIDS, integrated with maternal and newborn
health and nutrition.
45. The basic education component will (a) work within the SWAp to ensure that
in the national budget of strategies and plans priority will be given to early
childhood development and to timely enrolment and retention, to improved literacy
and numeracy, and to completion of primary schooling, especially of girls;
(b) enhance community mobilization and behaviour change of caregivers in support

10

of education; (c) enhance the Government’s capacity to attract and retain teachers,
particularly females and in underserved areas; (d) strengthen national and local
capacities to improve the school environment based on child -friendly, inclusive and
gender-sensitive school standards, policies, guidelines and budgets; (e) improve
teacher effectiveness through training on child-centred and gender-sensitive
teaching methods, as well as implementation of the revised primary and teacher
education curricula; (f) review policies and address bottlenecks to affordable
education, focusing especially on reducing disparities, and (g) strengthen HIV
prevention in schools as part of the upstream support for a school health package
(under leadership of the United Nations Population Fund).
46. The child protection component will establish or strengthen systems to
effectively deliver services for the protection of children, within the framework of a
National Social Protection Strategy and a SWAp on justice, law and order. It will
(a) strengthen legal and policy frameworks for child protection by providing
technical assistance to the design and implementation of laws, policies and
regulations, including the Children’s Act, the Orphan and Vulnerable Children’s
Policy, and the Birth and Death Registration Act; (b) improve standards for
children’s services and their inclusion within social protection and justice, law and
order strategies, as well as national and sectoral plans; (c) support development of a
minimum package of child protection services in focus districts for national level
replication; (d) strengthen government and community capacity to establish and
maintain child protection surveillance systems; and (e) enhance the Government ’s
capacity for management and oversight, effective budgeting, referral, and
coordination of social protection work.
47. The social policy and evaluation component will (a) strengthen capacity to
conduct and manage research, evaluation and policy analysis on children and
women to produce high-quality studies and evaluations with evidence for policies
and programmes; (b) support national and district capacity to conduct public
expenditure tracking and advocate for budgetary adjustments responsive to the
rights of children; (c) include children’s views in policies and programmes; (d) build
alliances with development partners and civil society stakeholders to advocate for
improvement of the situation of children and women, especially the most
disadvantaged; and (e) ensure that gender-issues are addressed in all programme
components.
48. The cross-sectoral component includes programme coordination; planning and
strategic information management; coordination of disaster risk reduction and
emergency
response;
communication
for
development;
and
external
communications. In addition to ensuring strong synergies and results -based planning
and management, it will (a) use mass media and communication technology at
community and national levels to encourage behaviour change; (b) document and
share knowledge for acceleration of child survival and development and other
programme results; (c) promote an evidence-based, constructive and nuanced
national and international dialogue on girls, boys and women’s issues; and
(d) leverage partnerships and resources from mass media, development partners and
the public.

11

Major partnerships
49. The UNICEF counterpart is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic
Development. Partners include the Office of the Prime Minister; relevant ministries;
national medical stores; Uganda AIDS Commission; Uganda Registration Services
Bureau; Uganda Police Force, Education Standards Agency; Uganda Bureau of
Statistics; National Curriculum Development Centre; Uganda National
Examinations Board; National Planning Authority; National Bureau of Standards;
National Council for Children; Human Rights Commission and the District
Governments in focus districts.
50. Collaboration with other United Nations agencies, development partners,
bilateral donors, UNICEF National Committees and others will be important for
coherent, coordinated responses, for resource mobilization and for harmonizing
advocacy. Partnerships with civil society organizations will remain critical for both
humanitarian and development work. Other key alliances include research institutes
and universities, parliamentarians and traditional leaders, and the private -sector.
UNICEF will increase aid effectiveness through membership in the Local Donor
Partnership Group and through technical assistance to Government -led SWAps or
other sectoral coordination mechanisms in education; health; HIV and AIDS; water
and environment; justice, law and order; and social development.
UNICEF will improve harmonization of programme delivery through joint
programming and joint programmes so as to avoid duplication, reduce transaction
costs and maximize impact and synergies among national partners and United
Nations agencies.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
51. Monitoring and evaluation will be harmonized with national, sectoral and
UNDAF monitoring and evaluation systems. It will (a) support the Office of the
Prime Minister and the Bureau of Statistics to develop a policy and strategy for
gender- and child-sensitive monitoring and evaluation of the NDP across all sectors;
(b) support harmonization of management information systems and provide
technical support for the establishment of standards and certification of national
statistics and research; (c) strengthen surveillance and survey systems to ensure
timely availability of valid, reliable disaggregated data and analysis on the situation
of children and women; and (d) increase access to strategic information, including
through evaluations, for performance monitoring and reporting.
52. The programme’s field monitoring system will be strengthened through
strategic choice of performance management indicators and targets, includ ing data
disaggregated by sex and age, and improved use of financial and programmatic field
monitoring reports on performance and progress towards efficiency and
effectiveness targets.
53. Overall management will be led by the Inter-Ministerial Country Programme
Management Team (CPMT), chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and
Economic Development, with members from the programme’s counterpart
ministries, government agencies, bureaux, commissions, the National Council for
Children, civil society and the UNICEF country management team.

12

54. Implementation, review and evaluation will be harmonized with the
Government’s annual and five-year calendars. Joint United Nations programmes,
including in gender, population and HIV and AIDS, will be managed and re viewed,
using joint management and monitoring mechanisms, and harmonized with national
monitoring and evaluation. The country programme midterm review will be led by
the CPMT as part of the NDP and UNDAF midterm reviews, in collaboration with
implementing partners at the district and central levels, including local governments
and non-governmental organizations partners.

13

