Uruguay
Country programme document
2011-2015

The draft country programme document for Uruguay
(E/ICEF/2010/P/L.25) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its second regular session
(7-9 September 2010).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 February 2011.

†

Basic data
(2008, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

0.9

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

14

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2002)

5
18 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2004)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2006)

100/100

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2005)

92

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2006)

100

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2006)

100

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%, 2007)

0.6 b

Child labour (%, children 5-14 years old, 2006)
GNI per capita (US$)

8c
8 260

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

94

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

95

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
The 2005 estimate developed by WHO/UNICEF/UNFPA and the World Bank, adjusted for
underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths, is 20 deaths per 100,000 live births.
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
b
According to official sources, the rate was 0.42 in 2008. Source: United Nations, Common
Country Assessment of Uruguay 2009.
c
Data differ from standard definition.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Uruguay has had a tradition of social protection since the early twentieth
century. Significant welfare achievements over the years include a reduction in
income poverty and income inequality, now among the lowest in the region. The
population profile shows an aging population with a demographic transition
completed decades ago. Historically, the social protection system focused mainly on
adult care and protection. As a consequence, despite the income poverty reduction
from 31.9 per cent in 2004 to 20.3 per cent in 2008, the incidence of poverty among
children is very high — 38.8 per cent of children under 6 years. 1 Income inequality
among adults and children persists in spite of an important reduction in poverty
income among the general population in the past years. Other characteristics of the
country’s poverty include its concentration in urban areas and high incidence among
single-parent households headed by women and among those of African descent,
who represent 9.1 per cent of the population. 2
__________________
1

2

2

National Statistics Institute of Uruguay, Estimaciones de Pobreza por el Método del Ingreso
2008, Montevideo, 2009.
In 2006 African descendents made up 50.1 per cent of those suffering from income poverty.
Source: National Statistics Institute of Uruguay, UNFPA and UNDP, “Perfil demográfico y
socioeconómico de la población uruguaya según su ascendencia racial”, Montevideo, 20 07,
pp. 17 and 49.

2.
Other critical issues that require consideration are the limited results of
policies targeting young children, high dropout rates in secondary education,
disparities in learning achievements, child abuse, persistent gaps between the legal
framework and institutional practices related to juvenile justice, and
institutionalized children.
3.
Uruguay shows good child health indicators, with under-five mortality at
14 deaths per 1,000 live births, as well as relatively high coverage of pre -primary
education. However, the situation of young children is still of significant concern.
Child poverty, chronic malnutrition, anaemia and poor child development affect a
significant proportion of children under five. 3 In past years, the Government
strengthened public policies and increased social investment directed to young
children. Nevertheless, not every child has guaranteed access to high-quality
services. The new programme of cooperation represents an opportunity to contribute
to national efforts to implement an integrated social protection system that includes
early childhood.
4.
Access to and completion of primary school has become almost universal, and
preschool coverage has increased significantly. Although learning deficits and gaps
between children from different socio-economic sectors persist in early and primary
education, the most critical problem is high levels of dropout in secondary school.
In 2008, 68.1 per cent of adolescents had graduated from compulsory lower
secondary school and 37.1 per cent from upper secondary school — 32.2 per cent of
boys and 41.8 per cent of girls. 4 Graduation rates have not changed significantly
since 1990. The country has significant disparities between different social contexts
and regions: 11 per cent of students graduate from upper-secondary school in the
poorest neighbourhoods of Montevideo while 80 per cent gra duate in the richest. 5
The education system still faces challenges, despite the reinforcement of policies
during recent years, including an increase in public expenditure from 3 per cent of
gross domestic product in 2005 to 4.5 per cent in 2009, according to the National
Council of Public Policies and Ministry of Social Development; the approval of a
new legal framework; and various innovations, particularly Plan CEIBAL, which
aims to provide one laptop computer per child in all public primary schools.
5.
An issue that continues to receive public attention is adolescent involvement in
criminal offences. Media and other groups influencing public opinion usually
overemphasize the participation of adolescents in criminal activity, deepening the
stigma against them. Over time, several proposals have been made to lower the
minimum age of legal responsibility. This would undermine the juvenile justice
system established by the Code of Childhood and Adolescence of 2004, which is
based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Furthermore, deprivation of
liberty is still commonly applied as a measure to “re-educate” adolescents in
conflict with the law. Adolescents deprived of their liberty — mostly boys — face
substandard living conditions in detention centres. T he Special Rapporteur of the
United Nations on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
__________________
3

4

5

One third (34 per cent) of children living below the poverty line are at risk or have a
developmental delay. Source: UNICEF, “Observatorio de los derechos de la infancia y la
adolescencia en Uruguay 2009”, Montevideo, 2009, p. 35.
Ministry of Education and Culture, “Anuario Estadístico de Educación”, Montevideo, 2009,
p. 65.
UNICEF, op. cit. p. 62.

3

punishment recently submitted a report covering the situation in jails, including
those detaining adolescents, which had a great impact on public opin ion.
6.
Physical and/or psychological violence against children within families was
put on the public agenda by research conducted by the Ministry of Social
Development in 2009. It found that 8 out of 10 adults in Montevideo and the
metropolitan area have inflicted some type of violence on at least one child under
their care. The high prevalence of child abuse in Uruguay demonstrates the degree
to which violence is still accepted as a correctional or educative practice.
7.
Though the HIV/AIDS epidemic is still concentrated, with a global prevalence
rate of 0.6 per cent, concerns remain regarding stigma and discrimination suffered
by affected populations, lack of prevention initiatives directed at adolescents and
mother-to-child transmission. Congenital syphilis is also a concern.
8.
In 2007, the Committee on the Rights of the Child urged the Government to
take action on the following issues (among others): (a) more effective
implementation of the Code of Childhood and Adolescence; (b) development of a
comprehensive National Plan of Action for children, increasing the public budget to
implement policies; (c) improvement in education quality to reduce repetition and
dropout rates; (d) development of a comprehensive data collection system on
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; (e) fulfilment of a
specialized system of juvenile justice; (f) regulation of the system for alternative
care, including efforts to de-institutionalize children; and (g) monitoring of cases
and the extent of violence, sexual abuse, neglect, maltreatment and exploitation. In
2008, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women urged implementation of national campaigns on the risks and consequences
of trafficking of women and girls. The major issues regarding women are violence
within families, unequal access to quality jobs and low participation in the political
system.
9.
Consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, at the end of the
last government administration all public institutions responsible for child policies
developed a participatory process for building a National Strategy for Children and
Adolescents (ENIA) 2010-2030. This initiative has been recognized by the
Government and the opposition parties as a road map for child policies.
Implementation of ENIA constitutes an excellent opportunity to place children in
the mainstream of public policy.
10. The Government has convened the opposition parties to build national
agreements on four strategic areas: education, public security, climate change and
energy. Ongoing negotiations on education policies represent an excellent
opportunity for the country programme, with UNICEF fulfilling a role as
intermediary, since national actors recognize it as an effective partner in facilitating
dialogue.
11. Civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector and academic
institutions have played an increasing role in promoting, protecting and monitoring
child rights. Despite some difficulties in seeing beyond their own interests, the
private sector and unions have begun to develop a vision of social responsibility,
progressively transforming themselves into relevant actors in economic, political
and social debates.

4

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2005-2010
Key results achieved
12. The most meaningful result was support to the development of ENIA 2010 2030. This strategy summarizes the political and technical consensus on key
priorities for children. It also represents an important step in meetin g international
commitments assumed by the country. UNICEF, jointly with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), actively promoted the development of ENIA and participated in the
process. UNICEF also supported the technical secretariat, produced documents and
facilitated the inclusion of adolescent voices and opinions through a survey.
13. The health, nutrition and development status of young children were assessed
and priorities were identified, and a national integrated early childhood development
plan was designed. Additionally, support was provided to local governments of the
largest Uruguayan provinces (Montevideo and Canelones) in integrated early
childhood development (IECD) programmes. Efforts were also made to raise public
awareness regarding the importance of investing in early childhood to break the
poverty cycle.
14. Technical assistance was provided to education authorities in formulating the
public budget and the sector plans in 2005. Several innovations were rolled out
between 2005 and 2009: (a) the Community Teachers programme, aiming to provide
learning support to children at home, which has been implemented to reduce
repetition rates in 30 per cent of urban primary public schools; (b) th e Promotion of
Universal Basic Secondary School Education programme, launched to prevent
dropout in lower secondary schools; and (c) development of tools to foster
adolescent participation in secondary schools. Finally, significant progress was
made in positioning the quality of secondary education and high school dropout as
priorities on the national agenda.
15. Key achievements in child protection include an inter-institutional agreement
to create a system of juvenile justice indicators, signed by the Sup reme Court of
Justice, Ministry of Interior and Institute for Children and Adolescents in Uruguay.
The agreement requires each institution to provide information on these indicators
annually. A National Integrated System for Protection against Violence was created
in 2007, and Parliament passed a law prohibiting physical and humiliating
punishment of children.
16. The role of the corporate sector was strengthened, and local fund -raising
significantly contributed to the country programme. A Consultative Coun cil of
Businesses was created, which played an important role in disseminating
information and analysis on the situation of children and women among business
leaders. This Council has also worked to encourage corporate social responsibility
practices among major companies.
Lessons learned
17. Knowledge generation (analysis and data collection) and systematization and
dissemination of innovative experiences have become key strategies. Although the
country has qualified technical resources, relevant partners recognized the need to

5

fill gaps in key areas that are usually not as well covered by official sources or
academic studies: children and justice, adolescents’ opinions and violence against
children, among others. The new country programme should reinf orce promotion of
knowledge exchange and innovative practices among countries.
18. During the midterm review carried out in 2007, the Government and CSOs
highlighted UNICEF technical assistance as a key resource on child rights
monitoring and policy design, saying it contributed significantly to the promotion of
agreements and national consensus on issues affecting children and women. It was
also pointed out that UNICEF has a significant role in the changes that occurred in
the public agenda, further highlighting its capacity to establish partnerships and
alliances.
19. Considering the political stability and the quality of democracy in the country,
it is crucial to support not only the Government but also Parliament and the
judiciary. Previous cooperation has shown that, to be effective, advocacy should be
built on a close and sustained relationship with a wide range of partners.
20. Promotion of cultural changes and transformation of social behaviours and
practices remain long-standing challenges. These changes should complement the
legal reforms and public policies developed by the country to fully guarantee the
rights of children and women.
21. United Nations reform in Uruguay, through inter-agency work, has contributed
to strengthening government alignment and programmatic coherence and reducing
potential overlap. The challenge is to reinforce the shift towards a new cooperation
profile of the United Nations as a complete system in upper-middle-income
countries like Uruguay. The contributions of the United Nations system should be
further based on its capacity to be a key partner in developing public policies for
human rights and human development.
22. During implementation of the country programme, the relationship with the
corporate sector was strengthened, including the understanding that the situation of
children can be improved by involving the business community in implementation
of national development priorities and strategies. Though UNICEF has close
relations with academia, more efforts are needed to mainstream child rights into the
core of university curricula and activities. The role of UNICEF as a knowledge
leader on children for the media and others also deserves to be strengthened.

The country programme, 2011-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

Public policies for social inclusion and equity

1 650

2 250

3 900

Child protection and institutional reform

1 000

1 600

2 600

Partnership and social mobilization for children

500

2 000

2 500

Cross-sectoral costs

600

400

1 000

3 750

6 250

10 000

Total

6

Preparation process
23. The components of the country programme are based on: (a) key results and
lessons learned that emerged from the midterm review; (b) the observations,
conclusions and recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
(c) strategic priorities agreed among the Government, opposition political parties,
CSOs and academic institutions during the dialogue carried out in the fr amework of
ENIA, as well as the goals and targets included in its Plan for the period 2010 -2015;
(d) the process of formulating the Common Country Assessment and United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2011-2015, and lessons learned
from the Delivering as One initiative pilot; and (e) meetings with the governmental
authorities, CSOs, the private sector, academic institutions and parliamentarians.
Programme components results and strategies
24. The overall goal of the country programme is “By 2015, significant strides
forward have been made in the fulfilment of child rights, by strengthening of public
policies to achieve the Millennium Development Goals with equity, providing
support to align the mission and goals of public institutions to the principles of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, and fostering social alliances for children
and the reduction of disparities”. The expected country programme resu lts are:
(a) the quality of public policies in IECD and education has been improved and
disparities in access and learning achievement are reduced; (b) children and
adolescents benefit from a legal framework and the mission and goals public
institutions aligned to the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
(c) civil society, the media and the private sector are engaged in mobilizing and
leveraging resources for children.
25. The following strategies will be applied to achieve the programme results:
(a) promotion and support to broaden the dialogue on public policies for children;
(b) monitoring and evaluation of public policies to feed into evidence -based
advocacy for pro-child legal and institutional reforms; (c) strengthening of national
and local capacities to develop and implement appropriate policies for children;
(d) facilitation and dissemination of innovative policies and approaches;
(e) promotion of new partnerships and alliances with emphasis on knowledge
centres and fostering of South-South cooperation and knowledge exchanges among
countries in the region to promote child rights.
Relationship to national priorities and UNDAF
26. The national priorities included in ENIA have been considered in preparation
of the new country programme. Priorities established in ENIA cover a broad scope
of social policy areas, and they include issues crucial for achieving higher levels of
child rights protection: (a) family support policies; (b) early child development
programmes; (c) strengthening and transformation of the public education system;
(d) health promotion policies; (e) development of opportunities for social inclusion;
(f) promotion of democratic participation and children’s and adolescents’ voices;
(g) strengthening of child protection system; and (h) transformation of the
relationship among children, adolescents and adults.

7

27. The country programme has been formulated considering its strategic
contribution to the UNDAF 2011-2015, as agreed between the Government and the
United Nations country team. The key results of the programme will contribute to
achieving the outcomes related to the UNDAF national development priorities:
“Strengthening national strategies to develop high-quality human capital (focusing
on IECD, health and education) aimed at reducing economic inequity and main
disparities (inter-generational, gender, racial and territorial)”; and “Strengthening of
quality of democracy based on capacity development of public institutions, the
promotion of citizenship participation, and the monitoring of human rights
according to conventions ratified by Uruguay”.
Relationship to international priorities
28. The country programme is focused on supporting achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, especially those related to p overty reduction,
universal basic education, child and maternal mortality and HIV/AIDS. It will also
contribute to priorities identified in the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan for
2006-2013. The country programme will further support the implementation p rocess
towards Goal 2021 in the area of education, as agreed by the Organization of Ibero American States in order to increase access to preschool and universalize primary
and secondary education.
Programme components
29. The country programme is composed of three components: (a) public policies
for social inclusion and equity; (b) child protection and institutional reform; and
(c) partnerships and social mobilization for children.
Public policies for social inclusion and equity
30. This component will contribute to strengthening national capacities to reduce
the main social development inequities. It will focus on two critical issues: (a) the
limited impact of policies devoted to early childhood despite growing social
investment; and (b) the high rate of dropout in secondary school and low and
unequal learning achievements in primary and secondary education. Through this
programme component, UNICEF will contribute to achieving the following result
by 2015: “Quality of public policies in IECD and education has been improved and
disparities in access and learning achievement reduced”.
31. Regarding IECD priorities, support will be provided to national efforts to
develop a comprehensive social protection system for children under five years old
and their families, as established by ENIA. This system will integrate health,
nutrition, social security and family-friendly interventions. Specific contributions
will be made to the further design and implementation of the system by
(a) validating innovative interventions carried out at the sub-national level;
(b) obtaining political consensus for design and implementation; and (c) supporting
the first phase of implementation.
32. Support will also be provided to the formulation and implementation of a
midterm plan to increase graduation rates from secondary school — through
increasing coverage, curricular reforms, dropout prevention programmes and back to-school interventions to reduce child labour, as well as promotion of policies to
improve learning achievements in primary schools in the poorest areas. At the end

8

of the country programme, at least 20 per cent of public secondary schools will be
covered by this plan, and policies to improve learning achievements will reach
20 per cent of urban public primary schools.
Child protection and institutional reform
33. The second programme component will contribute to aligning the legal
framework and mission and goals of public institutions to principles of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, other human rights conventions and
international treaties ratified by Uruguay. Based on a situation analysis and the
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, this component will
focus on three key issues: (a) lack of child rights monitoring mechanisms, with
particular attention to the situation of institutionalized children, violence and
adolescents in conflict with law; (b) gaps between the legal framework and
institutional practices; and (c) significant levels of violence against children and
women. This component will support efforts from public institutions and civil
society organizations to achieve the following result: “Children and adolescents
benefit from a legal framework and public institutions aligned to the Convention
principles”.
34. On the first key issue, efforts will be made to ensure the establishment of
sustained mechanisms for child rights monitoring. Expected results at the end of the
period are: (a) an independent mechanism is in place to monitor the fulfilment of
child rights, and (b) the country produces updated information on the situation of
children and adolescents. To achieve these results, technical assistance will be
provided to strengthen capacities of specialized institutions (Human Rights Institute
and Honorary Consultative Council on the Rights of Children). Alliances will be
increased between the Government and other stakeholders in Uruguayan society.
35. In reference to the second issue, support will be provided to public institutions
to fully implement a juvenile justice system and develop the alternative care system,
seeking to de-institutionalize children. The following results are expected: (a) a plan
is developed to close gaps between the legal framework and the practices of the
juvenile justice system; (b) the juvenile justice system is characterized by due
process, a strong legal defence and greater use of alternatives to deprivation of
liberty; and (c) reform is implemented to progressively reduce the number of
children under institutional care.
36. Regarding the third issue, advocacy will continue and technical assistance will
be provided to incorporate the prevention of violence against children and women in
the design of key social policies, in close collaboration with U.N. Women. At the
end of the country programme, the health and education sectors (at least) should be
implementing integrated prevention and care programmes addressing violence.
Specific attention will be given to providing technical assistance in policymaking
processes and in promoting positive and gender-sensitive child-rearing practices
among families.
Partnerships and social mobilization for children
37. The third programme component aims at strengthening the commitment to
child rights by civil society and the private sector. T his component will focus on
(a) building on the growing involvement of the private sector and business leaders
in social responsibility actions; (b) using the potential of the private sector as an

9

important partner to leverage resources for children and women in the conte xt of a
growing economy; and (c) addressing the inadequate treatment of child rights issues
in the media and the persistence of cultural barriers and prejudices that hinder child
rights fulfilment. This programme component will contribute to achieving the
following result: “Civil society, the media and the private sector are engaged in
mobilizing and leveraging resources for children”.
38. Regarding the first area, UNICEF will promote child rights mainstreaming in
the corporate social responsibility agenda. Expected results are: child-related issues
are included in social responsibility evaluation systems; and an increased number of
initiatives developed by corporations benefit children and adolescents. As per the
second area, partnerships will be strengthened with the media and private sector to
maximize a progressive increase in local fund-raising, both from corporations and
from individual donors. Corporate alliances will be the focus of long -term
partnerships.
39. Concerning the third area, attention will be given to fostering cultural changes
and a more positive role by media in favour of children. This will be achieved
through (a) regular communication activities on the situation of children;
(b) development of strong alliances with the media and journalism colleges;
(c) empowerment of children and adolescents to express their opinions; and
(d) awareness-raising programmes on the positive contribution of adolescents to
society.
Cross-sectoral costs
40. The cross-sectoral component covers the cost of operations and cross-cutting
issues, such as planning, monitoring and evaluation. It contributes to the Southern
Cone Operation Centre, the hub that manages key administrative functions for
UNICEF country offices in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay. This compon ent also
supports efforts made by the Delivering as One initiative to reduce transactional
costs.
Major partnerships
41. Partnerships with governmental institutions, Parliament, civil society,
academic institutions, the media and the private sector wil l be maintained and
strengthened. Within the Delivering as One framework, United Nations system
coherence and cooperation will be reinforced, especially with UNDP, UNFPA, U.N.
Women and other organizations, specifically the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization; Pan American Health Organization/World
Health Organization; Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS; and
International Labour Organization. The main governmental partners will be the
ministries of the Social Cabinet: Social Development (responsible for coordinating
implementation of ENIA), Education, Health, Housing, Sports and Economy, and
the Office of Planning and Budget. UNICEF will also develop a close relationship
with the Honorary Consultative Council on the Rights of Children and the recently
created Human Rights Institute. Moreover, cooperation will be sought with the
National Administration of Public Education, Uruguayan Institute for Children and
Adolescents, and the Programme for Childhood, Adolescence and Family in Risk
supported by the Inter-American Development Bank. Judicial institutions (Supreme
Court, Attorney General and police staff) and the national Congress will be key

10

counterparts, particularly for activities involving monitoring of child rights and
institutional reform. UNICEF will develop a strong cooperative relationship with,
among others, the two major local governments: Montevideo City Council and
Canelones City Council.
42. To facilitate changes in systems, attitudes and behaviours as part of p romoting
a human rights culture, UNICEF will develop strong partnerships with CSOs, the
private sector, academic institutions and the media. In this direction, the
Consultative Council of Businesses will be strengthened as a mechanism to
disseminate the corporate social responsibility approach among business leaders and
major companies in Uruguay. Media organizations will also be strategic partners in
promoting a positive image of adolescence to combat stigma, among other
objectives.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
43. Support will be provided for strengthening monitoring and evaluation of the
situation of children, based on a human rights approach. Monitoring will also
contribute to the development of quality assessment tools focusing on national
strategies, policies and plans for children and the production of quality,
disaggregated data. UNICEF will pursue strategic alliances with the National
Institute of Statistics, universities, centres of excellence and CSOs, coordinating
with the United Nations system, as well as key cooperation institutions including the
Inter-American Development Bank and Organization of American States. Technical
assistance will be provided to improve data collection and analysis, especially in
areas lacking information, while promoting the use of evidence-based data for
evaluation and assessment. Within the UNDAF framework, the Government and
UNICEF will hold a midterm review to jointly assess progress on country
programme achievements.
44. Monitoring and evaluation is a key tool for the country programme and the
UNDAF. It will require strengthening practices for planning, information generation
and dissemination of quality and disaggregated official data. This will benefit from
special efforts in the first two years of the country programme. A five-year
integrated monitoring and evaluation plan will define monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms, major studies, surveys, evaluations and research. To aid in monitoring
and advocacy, a situation analysis on children, adolescents and women will be
prepared during the first year of the country programme and updated in 2013. A
midterm review will be carried out in 2013 to evaluate advances and introduce the
adjustments necessary to achieve the expected results. In addition, review
mechanisms will be applied as well as regular field trips, periodic internal
assessments and reviews with partners.

11

