E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

United Nations

Economic and Social Council

Distr.: Limited
10 August 2015
Original: English/French/Spanish
For decision

United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
Second regular session 2015
8-10 September 2015
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*

Country programme document**
Uzbekistan
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Uzbekistan is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on a no-objection
basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of $19,295,000 from
regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $13,500,000 in other
resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the period
2016 to 2020.
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2014/1, the present document
reflects comments made by Executive Board members on the draft CPD that was
shared 12 weeks before the second regular session of 2015.

* E/ICEF/2015/12.

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

Programme rationale
1. Uzbekistan, with a child population of over 10 million, became a lower-middle-income
country in 2010. Notwithstanding a reported decrease in national income poverty rates from
26.1 per cent in 2004 to 15 per cent in 2012, disparities remain high, particularly in rural
areas and in Karakalpakstan, Kashkadarya and Surkhandarya regions, while social assistance
provided to children and their families has been steadily decreasing in recent years.1
2. The United Nations Inter-agency Child Mortality Report2 estimates under-five
mortality at 43 per 1,000 live births, and infant mortality at 37, while the State Committee on
Statistics (SCS) reports rates of 13.4 and 9.8, respectively. Infant mortality rates are higher
in rural areas and among children from the poorest quintile, with the most prominent
disparities found between regions.3 The United Nations Maternal Mortality Estimation Interagency Group reported a maternal mortality ratio of 36 per 100,000 live births, while official
sources reported an MMR of 20.
3. According to 2013 official data, child mortality has decreased. Nonetheless, neonatal
mortality remains unchanged, with the leading causes including birth-related complications
and neonatal infections. There is a high coverage of antenatal care and skilled attendants at
birth in the country. However, a determinant analysis, carried out according to the Monitoring
Results for Equity System (MoRES) methodology, indicated that high maternal and neonatal
mortalities are related to supply-side bottlenecks in the quality of healthcare services. The
Committee on the Rights of the Child stated in its 2013 concluding observations that the
quality of maternal, perinatal and early neonatal care in Uzbekistan is inadequate. 4
4. UNICEF global malnutrition estimates for 2008-2013 show that 20 per cent of children
in the country are stunted and 4 per cent are underweight. A survey5 found that 34 per cent
women of reproductive age have anaemia. Data (2012) from the National Institute of
Endocrinology show 32.5 per cent prevalence of iodine deficiency among the population,
including children. According to a Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) survey contained
in a 2011 Hygiene and Epidemiological Study on helminthiasis, less than 24 per cent of
school-age children wash hands at critical times during the day, which is a key factor
explaining helminthic infections affecting over 46 per cent of schoolchildren.
5. Poor childcare practices at home also constitute critical demand-side barriers to child
survival and well-being, especially for children living in rural areas, where more traditional
beliefs and less information prevail. A recent survey in two regions found that only 31 per
cent of caregivers are able to recognize danger signs for child health, 35 per cent have their
children’s hands washed after going to the toilet, and 39 per cent of children are exclusively
breastfed.6

1

Cabinet of Ministers Decree # 350 appears to further reduce the scope/size of the social allowances, Dec
2012; UNICEF Uzbekistan, Social Assistance for Low Income Families in Uzbekistan, Jan 2013.
2
United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, Level and Trends in Child Mortality,
2013.
3
Uzbekistan/UNICEF , Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2006.
4
United Nations, concluding observations on the combined 3 rd & 4th periodic reports of Uzbekistan
(CRC/C/UZB/CO 3-4), 2013.
5
Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition, Report to Assess Results of National Flour Fortification
Programme: Large Country-Lot Quality Assurance Survey Report, 2013.
6
KAP baseline assessment in 2 pilot region (Karakalpakstan, Namangan) on key childcare and development
practices (UNICEF and Ministry of Health, 2013).

2/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

6. By 2010, women made up 38 per cent of persons registered with HIV, confirming a
rising trend: by 2013, almost half of all new registered cases were among women and
children, with vertical transmission of HIV now accounting for 3.4 per cent of all new cases. 7
7. According to administrative data, 77 per cent of children aged 2-7 do not attend
preschool. Household surveys found that children from the richest quintile and urban areas
have much more opportunities for school readiness. 8 The enrolment gap between regions is
as high as 47 percentage points. 9 The key bottleneck here is the limited capacity of the
preschool system to reach all children with adequate quality services. Adverse social norms,
household behaviours and beliefs contribute to low demand and enrolment in preschool.
8. National statistics show a 99 per cent gross enrolment ratio in basic education (grades
1 to 9) with no significant gender 10 difference. The quality of education is not always
adequate, though: only 63.4 per cent 11 of children meet the national minimum learning
achievement standard in basic education, with fluctuating regional gaps. Key bottlenecks are
related to the uneven performance of the education system across regions: administrative data
show that the lowest percentage of adequately qualified teachers is found in rural areas, which
is reflected in poor learning achievements. In addition, children contracting water-borne
diseases due to inadequate hygiene behaviours and lack of hygiene facilities in schools may
drop out temporarily, while limited involvement of communities in the education process at
household and community level is another barrier to education opportunities for children.
9. Children with disabilities (CWD) are either enrolled in special institutions or are homeschooled. Data from the Ministry of Health show that there were 81,120 children under age
16 registered with disabilities in 2012 - slightly more boys (54 per cent) than girls,12 out of
whom 20,447 live in residential institutions, which represent about half of the total number
of children in institutions.13 A significant bottleneck is the continued use in the country of a
medical model that views disabilities as problems of individuals, rather than as a social model
which focuses on creating an enabling and inclusive environment. 14 Due to this, CWD and
their families are often stigmatized and hidden away from the public.
10. According to official data,15 there are about 24,672 children in residential institutions,
62 per cent of them boys. A 2014 study on children in institutions 16 showed that only 14 per
cent were orphans, while more than half were placed in residential care due to socioeconomic difficulties faced by their families. The bottlenecks contributing to
institutionalization are mainly related to a lack of a comprehensive combination of services
that meets the needs of vulnerable children and families. The study also showed gender
inequalities, including domestic violence, as driving factors.

7

Government of Uzbekistan, National Report on Progress toward implementation of the declaration on
HIV/AIDS, 2014.
8
Uzbekistan/UNICEF, MICS, 2006.
9
Ministry of Public Education, 2013-2014 Main indicators, 2014.
10
Government of Uzbekistan, Education Sector Plan 2013, citing MoPE.
11
Ibid.
12
UNICEF regional office, Uzbekistan: Country Profile, 2013.
13
Ibid.
14
Ibid.
15
State Committee on Statistics (SCS) data, TransMonEE 2014 (number does not to include 6,505 children
temporarily placed in sanatorium-type boarding schools in 2013 according to the Ministry of Public
Education).
16
UNICEF-commissioned study covering Baby and Children Homes: Andijan, Fergana and Samarkand
regions, 2014.

3/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

11. Between 2006 and 2013 the recorded number of crimes committed by children aged
13-17 fell slightly, from 2,853 to 2,655 annually (93 per cent committed by boys). The key
bottlenecks to overcome regarding justice for children, in order to effectively protect the
rights of child victims and witnesses of crime in justice processes, include the need to enact
new legislation, to have greater specialization of professionals, and to adapt court procedures.
12. The 2014 Country Programme Evaluation (CPE) found that the previous programme
had successfully established an effective high-level dialogue on key child rights issues, such
as, for example, child labour. This strategy, together with the attention given to the country’s
application to the Global Partnership for Education, resulted in progress made towards the
elimination of forced child labour in cotton production: the 2013 official International Labour
Organization assessment found no evidence of children under 14 harvesting cotton and, in
2014, no evidence of massive mobilization of children under 18.
13. The CPE also showed that technical assistance and evidence-based policy dialogue
during the previous programme of cooperation had led to the formulation of the 2011-2015
Multi-year Immunization Plan, which contributed to increased financial sustainability, with
the result that routine vaccines are now procured with Government funds. In addition, the last
programme largely contributed to the design and adoption of the first Education Sector Plan
2013-2017. Evidence-based policy dialogue led to the Government’s decision to prioritize
Early Childhood Education (ECE) and allocate $500 million for the implementation of the
2015-2020 State Programme on ECE Development, and also resulted in the decision to freeze
preschool parental fees, thus reducing access barriers for children living in poverty.
14. The CPE, however, highlighted that the previous programme’s capacity-building
strategies had largely focused on training of service providers and upgrading professional
curricula and protocols, but neglected to simultaneously address systemic bottlenecks
concerning monitoring and quality assurance systems, evidence-based decision-making and
budgeting. The CPE recommended that the new country programme expand its capacity
development efforts by gradually shifting away from training and by integrating policy
dialogue and modelling of new managerial approaches, so that relevant social sectors would
be better equipped to facilitate a holistic, effective and sustainable system change.
15. Finally, it was found that the work that the previous programme initiated in
Communication for Development (C4D), aimed at promoting positive behaviours and social
norms in family and community settings, had yielded limited results. The new programme
will therefore focus on the improvement of existing systems and on enhancing outreach
capabilities in an emerging middle-income context, so as to systematically and effectively
promote behavioural change among caregivers and other immediate duty-bearers. This
strategy will contribute to reducing barriers to the equitable realization of child rights in
family and community settings in a more sustainable and efficient manner.

Programme priorities and partnerships
16. The overall aim of the country programme is to accelerate progress towards the
realization of the rights of all children. Special attention will be paid to closing equity gaps
by zeroing in specifically on tackling the structural determinants of deprivations faced by
children living in rural areas within disadvantaged regions, and by focusing on CWD,
children in institutions, as well as children and adolescents living with HIV and AIDS.
17. The country programme is aligned with key national policies and strategies, and will
support the Government and civil society organizations (CSOs) in the implementation of the

4/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

concluding observations of the Committees on the Rights of the Child and the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women. UNICEF will specifically focus on strengthening national
capacities for reporting to the Committee on the Rights of the Child and will provide technical
assistance to key actors in charge of the oversight of national and subnational plans for the
implementation of the concluding observations, and of the follow up to the Sustainable
Development Goals related to children. UNICEF will also support the Government’s efforts
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
18. The programme of cooperation seeks to achieve results for children at different stages
of the life cycle, and will focus on selected outcomes of UNICEF’s Strategic Plan 2014-2017
related to health, education and child protection, while mainstreaming cross-cutting
components such as child rights monitoring and data for children and social inclusion, as well
as promoting equity in budgeting and in resource allocation.
19. The programme was developed in conjunction with the 2016-2020 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), and contributes directly to the achievement
of seven out of eight UNDAF outcomes, across four thematic areas: inclusive governance
and rule of law; improving livelihoods; social inclusion; sustainable use of natural resources
and preparedness for natural disasters.
Child health and well-being
20. Uzbekistan has taken measures to improve the health and well-being of women and
children. Over the last decade, several reforms have been implemented to increase the
efficiency and effectiveness of the health system, and reduce maternal and child mortality.
Despite these efforts and the good coverage of maternal and child healthcare services, these
have not yet resulted in a more equitable access or improved health status for the most
vulnerable. A 2013 health facility survey confirmed the poor quality of the majority of
maternity centres which do not meet required standards. Key bottlenecks in the quality of
health system still need to be addressed, as do barriers related to inadequate childcare
practices.
21. The most critical bottlenecks are the remaining gaps in the normative framework, the
low performance of health professionals in applying minimum service standards, and the
weak monitoring and quality assurance systems. In addition, poor coordination between
national and subnational levels, inappropriate budgeting and weak capacities of managers at
subnational levels to assess and analyse barriers to equitable and quality service delivery, all
create gaps between policy formulation and implementation.
22. The main barriers related to childcare practices are the prevalence of adverse social
norms and traditional beliefs, as well as the low capacity of the health system to provide
appropriate services, including counselling/consultation services to parents. Despite the
progress in prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, preventive and support
services throughout the lifecycle remain weak.
23. This programme component will strengthen the decentralized health system, and
enhance the capacity of district-level managers to identify bottlenecks, develop, implement
and monitor local plans that can address equity gaps and improve the quality of services in
two most deprived regions. Local improvement plans will address equity gaps and quality
related to maternal and child health, nutrition, HIV and AIDS and water, sanitation and
hygien. UNICEF will support modelling to demonstrate how the health system can
meaningfully evolve to reduce equity gaps in access and significantly improve quality of
healthcare. International knowledge-sharing, policy advice and technical assistance will

5/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

enable the revision of normative and regulatory frameworks, as well as the costing and
budgeting of key maternal and child health interventions.
24. In order to address demand-side barriers related to caregivers’ inadequate childcare and
development practices, this component will focus on strengthening the home visiting system
by developing new policies with requisite budgets, as well as by enhancing capacity of
patronage nurses. UNICEF will provide policy advice and technical assistance for modelling
home visiting plans, in two of the most deprived regions, which will include critical areas for
home visiting interventions, such as exclusive breastfeeding, infant and young child feeding,
knowledge of dangers signs for pregnancy and child health, early childhood stimulation and
hygiene promotion. This will also support cross-sectoral commitments to address child
violence and neglect. The model will be evaluated, costed and then used for scaling up and
leveraging resources. In support of these efforts, C4D strategies will address care practices
for the most vulnerable children.
25. This component will strengthen the existing health monitoring system, including
developing real-time monitoring to generate evidence for policy development and health
management and coordination. It will also work towards expanding the operating space to
address adolescents’ issues through policy dialogue and C4D interventions, and support to
children/adolescents living with HIV and AIDS.
26. These interventions are linked to the national priorities for the development of new
frameworks for quality, efficient and inclusive health care, as well as to the health care quality
assessment system. UNICEF will work closely with the Ministry of Health, Ministry of
Finance, their district departments and Khokimiyats, national and international academic and
research institutions, as well as relevant United Nations agencies.
Quality learning for all
27. Uzbekistan has made efforts to progressively realize the right to education for all,
including with the adoption of the Education Sector Plan (ESP). The comparatively high
public investment in the sector shows commitment to education. Children enjoy full access
to education as a result of supportive legislation and a well-established network of schools.
However, quality education for all remains a challenge.
28. The key determinants keeping the quality of education lower than expected in a middleincome country like Uzbekistan are a fact-based teacher-centred curriculum, the limited
system of teacher development, the inadequate school management with a weak capacity to
generate reliable educational evidence, and sporadic community and student participation in
the education process.
29. It is also important to note that awareness of emergency preparedness and response is
limited in the country. There is limited school-based emergency planning and many students
and teachers are not aware of how to properly respond or mitigate risks. Most schools have
been found to have major non-structural safety shortcomings, increasing vulnerabilities of
children and staff.
30. The most critical bottlenecks for ECE are fragmented and incoherent policies and the
rigidity of the education system, which inhibits the establishment of flexible and affordable
quality alternative early education arrangements. Almost all existing programmes are too
costly and not accessible to disadvantaged children. There is also limited understanding of
the importance of pre-school education in the family and the community.

6/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

31. The previous country programme focused on improving quality of preschool and school
education, by introducing an alternative and affordable ECE programme with a curriculum
based on contextualized Early Learning and Development Standards. In addition, the teacher
training system was strengthened to include the additional workforce requirements, while
child-friendly schools parameters were introduced as a basis for quality education. In-service
and pre-service training systems were strengthened to promote child-centred teaching.
32. This programme component will continue to address important bottlenecks and barriers
to equitable quality education, and to improve access for vulnerable children to affordable
preschool education. In ECE, UNICEF will support the Government to develop three lowcost alternative programmes and evaluate these models to develop appropriate policies for
early learning and school readiness. This will strengthen the synergies between policies,
effective management and cooperation on one hand, and the expansion of services on the
other, with the aim of reaching the most vulnerable and excluded children. In order to address
socio-cultural barriers to quality pre-primary and primary school education, UNICEF will
support a comprehensive study of social norms and cultural beliefs and help to develop
effective communication strategies to increase the demand for education services.
33. This component will also assist the Government in its efforts to reform the education
curriculum, and develop more professional competency-based learning/teaching for teachers
and school managers. UNICEF will support strengthening the existing education monitoring
system and its ability to measure whether system-level interventions do result in equitable
learning outcomes for vulnerable children. A capacity-gap analysis will be conducted and an
appropriate strategy mix designed to improve teacher recruitment, development and
retention.
34. This programme component will also raise awareness and improve emergency planning
and response practices in schools and communities. UNICEF will support the Ministry of
Public Education to develop communication programmes to improve hygiene behaviour in
schools. This will result in better health for children, help reduce absenteeism, increase
learning outcomes, improve communities’ health and empower children, especially those
living in remote rural areas, to become agents of change.
35. This component is closely linked to key national priorities aimed at developing new
frameworks for quality education and building a national assessment system of quality of
education in accordance with international standards, as well as at promoting greater access
to ECE. UNICEF will continue to support the Child-Friendly Schools principles, focusing on
learning achievement, and will promote the use of Out-of-School Children Initiative
methodologies to generate disaggregated data on children dropping out, children not
attending preschool education and CWD.
Child protection
36. Important efforts have been made in building evidence on the placement of children in
institutions and to comply with international standards for Justice for Children. Significant
results were achieved in establishing a gate-keeping mechanism to address children’s rights
to protection. However, the child protection system still lacks a coherent national strategy
that clearly identifies accountability structures and functions of Government agencies,
establishes legislation, standards, statutory guidance and protocols, and stipulates procedures
for service delivery through well-structured inter-agency and inter-ministerial linkages.
Diversion mechanisms and alternatives to deprivation of liberty also need further
development and implementation.

7/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

37. The main supply-side bottlenecks that hinder a functional child protection system is the
fragmentation of the protection mandate among different line Ministries and the weak intersectorial coordination, and the lack of a well-coordinated and well-resourced child protection
system involving various actors. Another bottleneck is the limited data availability on child
protection-related issues. There is inadequate public data on abuse, violence and neglect, and
no systematic means of identifying and supporting children at risk, or children who suffered
such violations. Investigations and proxy data have indicated that violence against children
is significant, but is underreported. Demand-side barriers to preventing the violation of these
rights, and which need be addressed as a matter of priority, include community awareness on
domestic violence and acceptance of corporal punishment.
38. A recent study17 shows that, although some safeguards do exist, the main bottlenecks
to promoting the participation, protection and reintegration of child victims and witnesses of
crime are the lack of legislative framework and services. In addition, the absence of
specialized professionals, including specialized judges to consider cases with involvement of
children in all court proceedings, represent another set of bottlenecks.
39. This component will continue to provide high-level technical assistance to the
Government, with a focus on policy development, system reform, and knowledge
management at national level, and on monitoring childcare and protection gate-keeping
systems at the subnational levels. UNICEF will make available the best technical expertise
and practices to improve the legislative and normative frameworks for children in contact
with the law, as well as to increase the capacity of the judiciary to apply child-friendly court
procedures. In order to achieve a more functional child protection system, UNICEF will also
provide technical assistance to strengthen the collection and analysis of child protection data
that can help to develop and improve the legal, policy and regulatory frameworks.
40. As a lesson learned from the previous country programme, this component will foster
a long-term and sustainable vision for a functioning child protection system, by linking it to
the broader social welfare and social protection systems, with an emphasis on developing a
de-institutionalization strategy and preventing institutional placement. This component will
also build inter-sectoral linkages with health and education to strengthen the capacity to
identify cases of violence, neglect and abuse and address harmful practices and social norms.
41. Given that the majority of children in institutions are CWD, a situation analysis will be
conducted as a foundation for country-level advocacy and inclusive programming. The
analysis will be conducted from a multi-sectoral perspective to establish a baseline and is
expected to result in increased knowledge and awareness about the situation and rights of
CWD.
42. Being strongly rooted on evidence and firmly based on thorough analysis, this
component will also encompass efforts to strengthening the child rights monitoring system,
which will be applied as crosscutting strategy, and work synergistically with the other
programme components.
Cross-sectoral
43. In order to achieve programme results, key programme strategies will include
communication for social change to address social norms and socio-cultural practices and
beliefs that are harmful to children, and represent the main structural barriers to the realization

17

Government of Uzbekistan/UNICEF, Analysis of compliance of national legislation with international standards related to Justice for Children, 2015.

8/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

of child rights. In addition, data collection and analysis for child rights monitoring will be
strengthened to support cross-sectoral linkages, so that decision-making on children is
increasingly based on data which are timely, reliable and sufficiently disaggregated and thus
enable the identification of the most vulnerable children, and can form the basis for policy
dialogue for child rights and equity among policymakers, and with children themselves.
Finally, innovative solutions to overcome bottlenecks and barriers will be modelled to scale
up improved services after proper evaluation. This will be accompanied by technical
assistance and capacity development for an equitable and sustainable delivery of these
services.
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Child health and well-being

6 000

4 500

10 500

Quality learning for all

6 000

5 000

11 000

Child protection

4 525

1 500

6 025

Cross-sectoral

2 770

2 500

5 270

19 295

13 500

32 795

Total

Programme and risk management
44. This CPD outlines UNICEF contribution to results for children in Uzbekistan. It serves
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board. Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to this country programme are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the
internal controls framework.
45. Cross-sectoral linkages will be enhanced by mobilizing top-notch technical expertise in
communication for social change, evidence generation and knowledge management, and
emergency preparedness and response, in support to all relevant results across programme
components. Intersectoral working groups will be established to ensure linkages across the
three main stages of the life cycle, and to tackle cross-cutting issues such as disabilities,
deinstitutionalization and HIV and AIDS. The country programme will evolve towards
greater engagement on evidence-based dialogue and resource-leveraging, which are core
roles in middle-income countries.
46. The limited availability of evidence may negatively influence decision-making and
hinder proper measurement of results. The ongoing dialogue with line Ministries and the SCS
will build on the significant progress made in 2014 that led to Uzbekistan re-joining the
Transformative Monitoring for Enhanced Equity (TransMonEE) database after seven years,
and will strive for further improving the access and quality of evidence and knowledge on
the situation of child rights.
47. The 2014 CPE found that the scope for dialogue and action between the parties of the
country programme of cooperation varies across child rights and priority areas. In view of

9/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

the gains still to be made in the programme operating space, some priority results will require
a longer time to be achieved, and therefore specific milestones will be monitored throughout
the programme cycle to ensure that there is sustained progress towards programme goals. To
this end, the country programme will make strategic investments in key knowledge areas,
especially through child rights monitoring.

Monitoring and evaluation
48. A critical bottleneck to the equitable realization of children’s rights relates to the
features of national monitoring systems and accountability mechanisms. Though a long-term
goal, the country programme will increasingly focus on enhancing managerial and quality
assurance functions to facilitate quality improvement of social services and systematic focus
on the most vulnerable. Data collection systems will be strengthened to foster the production
of indicators and related data that are aligned with international standards, and where the
quality of the information is enhanced, including with greater disaggregation and analysis.
49. National monitoring and evaluation systems will be strengthened through sectoral and
inter-sectoral approaches. Partnership with United Nations agencies will be critical. The
programme will be implemented in coordination with UNDAF results groups, thus ensuring
coherence across United Nations agencies, in line with a flexible and context-specific
application of the Delivering as One Standard Operating Procedures.
50. Through the use of a rolling Situation Analysis, the country programme will regularly
track the situation of children and women and, based on the MoRES methodology, it will
also track changes in the bottlenecks and barriers determining inequalities and measure
progress against their elimination.
51. Each of the three outcomes will be evaluated once during the programme cycle, while
annual and thematic reviews will be informed by periodic assessments. Selected impact
evaluations will inform policy decisions for scaling up models that meet international
standards and best practices that promote the best interests of children.

10/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

Annex
Results and resources framework
Uzbekistan-UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2016-2020
Convention on the Rights of the Child articles: 5,6,7,12,18,19,20,23,24,26,28,29,32,33,36,37,39
National Priorities:
 Sustainable Development Goals:1,2,3,4,5,6,10,11,13,16,17
 2014-2016 Universal Periodic Review National Action Plan (NAP)
 2013-2017 Education Sector Plan
 2015-2020 State Programme on preschool development
 2014-2018 State Programme on further strengthening reproductive health of population, maternal, children and adolescent healthcare
 2013-2017 Strategic Programme on combating HIV and AIDS
 2015-2018 NAP on prevention and treatment of helminthiasis among children
 Committing to Child Survival: A Promise Renewed; Scaling Up Nutrition;Global Partnership for Education
UNDAF outcomes involving UNICEF:
Outcome 1: By 2020, equitable and sustainable economic growth through productive employment, improvement of environment for business, entrepreneurship
and innovations expanded for all
- Status of development and approval/endorsement of national Sustainable Development Goals and system of monitoring
Outcome 2: By 2020, vulnerable groups benefit from an inclusive, financially sustainable and efficient social protection system
- Public spending on social allowances as % of gross domestic product
- Share of social benefits in the structure of disposable income of families that receive social benefits
- Share of female-headed vulnerable households covered by social protection schemes
Outcome 3: By 2020, children and women in need of protection are covered with comprehensive support in line with human rights standards
- Number of children in residential care
- Availability of functional child protection gatekeeping system
- Availability of normative framework to provide comprehensive care and support to women and children at risk of potential domestic/gender-based violence
Outcome 4: By 2020, all people benefit from quality, equitable and accessible health services throughout their life course

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

- Percentage of health facilities (maternities, children hospitals and PHC facilities) in targeted regions applying World Health Organization (WHO)/UNICEF
newborn and child survival standards1/protocols
- Coverage by measles vaccine for children under 24 months
Outcome 5: Continuous quality education as well as lifelong learning for all improved by 2020
- Preschool gross enrolment ratio (2-7 years old)
- Compliance of monitoring and evaluation system of the quality of Early Childhood Education and Care with “State Requirements for Preschool Education”
- Proportion of students (grades 5 and 9) whose learning outcomes comply with the requirements of State Educational Standards
Outcome 6: By 2020, rural population benefits from sustainable management of natural resources and resilience to disasters and climate change
- 7% of rural communities in disaster-prone areas able to apply proactive disaster risk reduction activities (including through modern ICT) according to Hyogo
and Post- Hyogo Framework for Action
Outcome 7: By 2020, the quality of public administration is improved for equitable access to quality public services
- Extent to which public institutions provide, use and assess quality data for evidence-based policy-making
- Extent to which data is accessible, including through open Government/open data national mechanism, and used by media and civil society organizations
(CSOs) for public oversight
Outcome 8: Legal and judicial reforms further ensure strong protection of rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of citizens
- Percentage of criminal and civil court cases involving children in which courts apply child-sensitive procedures in line with adopted standards (in priority
geographical areas)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan outcomes: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7

1

WHO/UNICEF standards: Effective perinatal care; Essential newborn care; Managing newborn problems; Newborn resuscitation; Home visits for the newborn child; Integrated Management of
Childhood Illness; Hospital care for children; Expanded Programme on Immunization; Infant and young child feeding; Vitamin A supplementation for infants and children 6-59 months; Prevention of
mother-to-child transmission antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in infants and children; Adolescent HIV counselling and care

12/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

UNICEF
outcomes

Key progress indicators, baselines and targets Means of
verification

Indicative country
programme (CP) outputs

Major partners,
partnership
frameworks

Indicative resources
by CP outcome (in
thousands of United
States dollars)
RR
OR
Total
Health Facility 1.By 2020, health managers
Ministry of Health, 6 000 4 500 10 500
By 2020
Proportion of mother and child health care
mothers and
facilities correctly applying newborn and child Survey
have increased capacity to
Ministry of
children,
survival standards
implement evidence-based and Finance and their
especially the Baseline: by 2015
equity-focused district health regional
(By regions and tracers3)
most
system strengthening plans,
departments, sister
vulnerable,2
Target: TBD
including
in
emergencies
UN agencies,GIZ
have access to
quality
Proportion of children aged 2-59 months
healthcare
receiving medical care by General Practioner
2. By 2020, national authorities
KAP survey on have increased capacity to
services
doctors according to approved
household
(individual and protocols/standards
formulate evidence-based
Baseline: by 2015
behaviours
population
regulatory framework and
(By regions and tracers)
based),
budgets for key maternal,
Target: TBD
including in
newborn, child and adolescent
emergencies
Proportion of children aged 0-59 months with
health packages of
symptoms of pneumonia taken to appropriate
health provider services4
interventions
Baseline: by 2016
(By regions)
3.By 2020, health providers
Target: TBD
and communities have
increased capacity to provide
Proportion of mothers/caregivers in target
counselling and support to
(models) regions who practice recommended
caregivers and children from
key behaviours:
pregnancy to adolescence
UNGASS
a. Exclusive breastfeeding (under 6 months)
(United

2

Vulnerable children are children living in the most deprived rural areas of disadvantaged regions of Karakalpakstan, Kashkadarya and Surkhandarya, CWD, children in institutions, and
children/adolescents living with HIV and AIDS.
3
Tracers are dimensions of care with the most critical bottlenecks, i.e., normal delivery, case management and sick newborn care, management of pneumonia in hospital
4
WHO international standards for appropriate health provider service.

13/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

Nations
Timely initiation of complementary feeding General
Assembly
(6-12 months)
Special Session
c. Knowledge on danger signs for children (0-59 on HIV/AIDS)
report
months)
Baseline for a/b/c: by 2016
(By regions)
Target for a/b/c: TBD
b.

Mother to child HIV transmission rate
Baseline: 3.4%
Target: under 2%
By 2020, girls Preschool gross enrolment ratio (GER) (2-7
and boys
years old)
Baseline: 23.3% (regional gap: 47pp.)
benefit
equitably from Target: 45%5 (maximum regional gap: 27pp.)
improved
preschool
Proportion of school children (grades 5 and 9)
education and whose learning outcomes comply with the
enhanced
requirements of State Educational Standards
quality of basic Baseline: 63.4% (regional gap: TBD6pp; gender
gap: TBD pp)
education
Target: 70% (regional gap: TBD/2; gender gap:
including in
TBD)
emergencies

Ministry of
Public
Education
(MoPE)
Statistical
Yearbook

1.By 2018, MoPE has revised
Early Childhood Education
policy frameworks for
improved access to equitable
quality preschool services
2.By 2019, MoPE has
increased capacity to deliver
and measure learning in line
with a competency-based
curriculum

MoPE, MoH,
MinFin and
Emergency
Situations, State
Committee on
Statistics (SCS),
Regional
authorities, local
education group

6 000

5 000 11 000

3.By 2020, local education
authorities and communities
are equipped with tools and
skills to encourage demand for
quality basic education and
preschool services

5
6

Currently GER disaggregated by gender is not available for preschool education in the country. UNICEF will work with the Government to ensure availability of data by the end of the CP.
UNICEF is working with the Government to ensure reliable data on regional and gender gaps are available by end-2015.

14/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

4.By 2020, line Ministries7 are
equipped with tools and skills
to promote safe behaviour
practices among children and
communities before and during
emergencies
By 2020, the
most
vulnerable girls
and boys,
increasingly
access
prevention and
response
services to
address
violence,
neglect and
abuse

SCS official
data

1.By 2020, Government has
increased capacity to apply
systematic approach in
addressing child protection
issues in line with international
Assessment of good practices
Percentage of civil and criminal court cases
involving children in which courts apply child- judicial
sensitive procedures in line with international practices
2.By 2020, justice
standards9 (in priority areas)
professionals have increased
Baseline: by 2015
capacity to manage cases
(By civil and criminal proceedings)
involving children in contact
Target: TBD
with the law according to
international standards.
Number of girls and boys admitted into
residential institutions8 (annually)
Baseline: By 2015
Target: TBD

3.By 2020, education and
health front line workers have
increased capacity to identify

4 525
MoPE, MoH,
Ministries of
Labour/Social
Protection, Justice,
and Interior,
Prosecutor
General’s Office,
Supreme Court,
Commission on
Minors, nongovernmental
organizations, ,
subnational
authorities,
academia

1 500

6 025

7

MoPE, MoH, MoES
Residential institutions: Baby homes are residential care institutions under the MoH for under 3 orphans and children left without parental care and children with challenges in psycho-physical
development. Mekhribolik homes are residential care institutions under the MoPE for 3-16 orphans and children without parental care. Children’s towns are residential care institutions under the MoPE
for 0-16 children left without parental care.
9
List of standards to be considered: specially trained judges; access to/presence of defence lawyer at all stages; independent legal representative/lawyer appointed for a child in a case of conflict of
interest between child and parent/caregiver; timely completion of children’s cases; in-camera court proceedings; conducive environment ensuring child/juvenile participation/expression of his/her views;
use of language appropriate to child’s age/level of understanding; prevention of child victim from having contact with perpetrator when giving testimony in court.
8

15/16

E/ICEF/2015/P/L.20

children at most risk to suffer
from violence and abuse and
apply referral protocols
4.By 2020, authorities at all
levels and CSOs have
increased capacity to
effectively contribute to child
rights monitoring and reporting
Cross-sectoral

Effective development, planning, coordination,
communication, delivery and monitoring of
country programmes results.

Periodic
reviews and
evaluations of
programme
components

Tools, guidance and resources
are available to the country
programme for effective
communication on child rights
issues with all stakeholders

2 770

2 500

5 270

Strategies to address crosscutting issues related to child
rights implemented.
Guidance, tools and resources
to effectively design and
manage programmes are
available to UNICEF and
partners
Total resources

19 295 13 500 32 795

________

16/16

