Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Country programme document
2015-2019

The draft country programme document for Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (E/ICEF/2014/P/L.2) was presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2014 annual
session (3-6 June 2014).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2014 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 11 September 2014.

Basic data †
(2012 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years, male/female)
Under 5 mortality rate (U5MR) (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (per cent, moderate and severe, 2007)
(per cent, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, adjusted, 2010)

5.3/5.0 a
15
4
..
92 b

Use of improved drinking water sources (per cent, 2005)
Use of improved sanitation facilities (per cent, 2005)

93
91

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (per cent)

81

One-year-olds immunized against measles (per cent)

87

Primary school enrolment/attendance (per cent, net male/female, 2011)
Survival rate to last primary grade (per cent, male/female, 2011)
Adult HIV prevalence rate (per cent, male/female)
HIV prevalence among pregnant women (per cent)

94/95
90/98
0.7/0.4
..

Child labour (per cent, 5-14 year olds, male/female, 2000)

9/2

Birth registration (per cent, under 5 years of age, 2011)

81 c

(per cent, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
Gross national income per capita (US$)
†
a

b

c

..
12,460

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at www.childinfo.org.
This figure corresponds to projections based on the 2001 population census. The national
estimate according to the 2011 population census is 4.6/4.3.
This is the adjusted mortality ratio estimate prepared by the Child [sic] Mor tality Estimation
Inter-Agency Group (MMEIG). The estimate at the country level is 72.2 deaths per 100,000
live births (2011), as presented in the Venezuelan government report, Cumpliendo las Metas
del Milenio (“Meeting the Millennium Goals”), 2012, p. 69.
This estimate is based on a definition of the indicator that differs from the standard
definition. It refers to the percentage of births recorded each year, plus the percentage of
children under five years who are registered. The figure at the national level is 76 per cent of
births reported on time (during the first year of life).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Venezuela has a population of 28.9 million. Of this total, 9 million (32.7 per
cent) are children (under 18 years of age). Some 2.8 per cent 1 of the population belongs
to one of the 51 indigenous ethnic groups, concentrated in 6 per cent of the country’s 335
municipalities, while 3.5 per cent identify themselves as Afro-descendents and/or black,
and are scattered across 80 per cent of the municipalities; 48 per cent of indigenous
persons
are
under
age
18,
while
the
equivalent
figure
for
Afro-descendents is 23 per cent. Nationwide, 2.5 per cent of children (221,000) have
some form of disability. Venezuela has the third highest per capita income in Latin
America 2 and the lowest rate of income inequality. 3 The country is essentially urban
__________________
1

2
3

2

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Instituto Nacional de Estadistica de Venezuela (National
Statistics Institute), La Población Indígena de Venezuela (“The Indigenous Population of
Venezuela”), 2011 Census. Electronic bulletin, October 2013, p. 5.
World Bank, per capita GNI, 2012.
Gini coefficient. Source: ECLAC, Social Panorama of Latin America, 2013, p. 91.

(88.8 per cent) and 68 per cent of the population occupies only 22 per cent of the
national territory. However, disparities persist, particularly among indigenous and
Afro-descendent populations, persons with disabilities, and people living in
peri-urban and rural areas.
2.
Venezuela has made significant progress towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), particularly in ter ms of reducing extreme poverty and
hunger, universalizing education, empowering women and providing access to water
and adequate sanitation. It has also played an important role internationally, fostering
multilateral relations among countries and promoting regional associations, such as
the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America ( Alianza Bolivariana para los
Pueblos de Nuestra América, ALBA) and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC). Nevertheless, there remain some challe nges, particularly
with respect to children and women.
3.
Although the country achieved the extreme poverty reduction target in 2006, the
2011 census shows that there are still 7.4 million people living in poverty (of whom
3.3 million are children) 4 and 2.2 million in extreme poverty (50 per cent of whom
are children). Some 80 per cent of indigenous children are poor (and 50 per cent are
extremely poor), while the respective figures for Afro-descendent children are 50 per
cent and 20 per cent.
4.
Venezuela has made significant progress in reducing infant mortality (in 2011
the rate stood at 14.8 deaths per 1,000 live births) and under-five mortality (2011:
15.3 per 1,000 live births). Of children who die before the age of 5, 96.3 per cent die
before their first birthday, and 78 per cent of these deaths are preventable. Neonatal
mortality is a challenge: the rate has remained virtually unchanged since 2002, and
represents around 71 per cent of infant deaths (under 1 year). Despite progress in
providing access to antiretroviral drugs for seropositive persons, mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, at 25.5 per cent, 5 is still a serious concern. Of pregnant women
who test seropositive, 33.5 per cent receive antiretroviral drugs, and 65.3 per cent of
the children born to seropositive mothers are given a virological test within the first
two months of life (2012).
5.
The Government has set the following health priorities: (a) reduce maternal
mortality (where the rate was 72.2 per 100,000 live births in 2011), despite t he fact
that 95 per cent of childbirths are institutionalized; and (b) prevent adolescent
pregnancy, given that Venezuela has one of the highest adolescent fertility rates
(101 for every 1,000 women aged 15 to 19 years) in the region, and 23 per cent of
births are to adolescent mothers, with higher rates among those living in extreme
poverty (double those for the non-poor), in rural areas (50 per cent higher than in
urban areas) and among Afro-descendent and indigenous adolescents (34 per cent
higher than for other ethnic groups).
6.
The country has made progress with nutrition for children under five, and has
reduced the wasting rate (low weight-for-height – 2002: 4.8 per cent; 2012: 2.73 per
cent) as well as the stunting rate (low height-for-age – 2002: 12.9 per cent; 2009: 9.5
per cent) and the underweight rate (low weight-for-age – 2002: 3.7 per cent; 2009:
__________________
4
5

1.7 million males and 1.6 million females.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Informe Nacional de Avances en la Lucha contra el SIDA
(“National report on progress against AIDS”) (GARPR, 2012). The figure is based on estimates for
Venezuela by the UNAIDS Spectrum programme.

3

3.2 per cent). 6 The country’s priorities are: (a) to reduce by 12 per cent the overweight
population aged 7 to 14 years (2002: 15.5 per cent; 2007: 1 9.3 per cent) and (b) to
increase the prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding to 70 per cent (despite progress,
only 27.8 per cent of newborns under six months were being exclusively breastfed in
2008, and the children of urban female professionals were at the greatest disadvantage
in this respect).
7.
Although Venezuela has achieved significant progress towards making primary
education universal (92.2 per cent in 2011), the sixth grade completion rate is not
universal; many children are behind the normal grade level for their age (from age
nine onwards); and there are problems of access and quality, particularly in preschool
and secondary school, where coverage rates are 70.5 per cent and 75.1 per cent
respectively. 7 In 2011, 1.3 million or 14.3 per cent of school age children
(3-17 years) were not attending school. 8 The greatest gaps were in preschool (34 per
cent) and in secondary school (18 per cent), while the gap in primary school was only
4.7 per cent. These gaps are associated with gender (boys are less likely to attend
school, and this trend persists at all school levels), with disabilities (26.4 per cent
non-attendance), cultural diversity (30 per cent of indigenous children and
20 per cent of Afro-descendent children do not attend school), socioeconomic level
(30 per cent of poor children do not attend school), and place of residence (school
attendance is lower in rural and peri-urban areas). 9
8.
Venezuela has a comprehensive legislative framework for the protection of
children’s rights. However, there are two areas of challenges: (a) the civil registry of
births, and (b) the prevention of and care for violence, exploitation and abuse
committed against children. There has been significant progress in the last five years
towards the universalization of the right to identity, yet 25 per cent of children are not
registered during the first year of life; at a particular disadvantage are indigenous
children and those living in isolated areas, where up to 53 per cent of births may not
result in timely registration. The adolescent homicide rate is among the highest i n the
region (57.3 per 100,000 in 2010), and the majority of victims are male adolescents.
The great majority of homicides (86 per cent) occur in 79 of the country’s 335
municipalities (large, highly urbanized population centres). Girls are the princip le
victims of sexual violence, accounting for 84 per cent of recorded cases: 10 39 per cent
of victims are under 10 years of age, 34.8 per cent between 10 and 13 years, and 26.2
per cent between 14 and 17 years. Children under 10 years accounted for 48 per cent
of child abuse cases in 2008. This is one of the areas in which there is still a
considerable information gap, particularly on issues such as child abuse, child labour,
juvenile justice, institutionalization, child trafficking, sexual trafficking and
__________________
6

7

8

9

10

4

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Instituto Nacional de Nutrición (National Nutrition Institute),
SISVAN 2009 and 2012.
República Bolivariana de Venezuela, Ministerio del Poder Popular de Plantificación (Planning
Ministry), Sistema Integrado de Indicadores Sociales de Venezuela, SISOV (Integrated System
of Social Indicators of Venezuela, SISOV according to the Spanish acronym) 2011.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, El Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda (National
population and housing census), 2011.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, El Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda (National
population and housing census), 2011.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ministerio del Poder Popular de Interior, Justicia y Paz; Cuerpo
de Investigaciones Científicas, Penales y Criminalísticas (CICPC) (Ministry of the Interior, Justice
and Peace, Scientific, Penal and Criminal Investigations Unit). Crime statistics, 2008 (the latest data
available).

exploitation, and in terms of the levels of disaggregation, timeliness and accessibility
of the information.
9.
Venezuela is vulnerable to emergency situations provoked by natural disasters,
in particular torrential rains and earthquakes. A significant portion of the poor
population live in communities that are at high risk from earthquakes, floods and
landslides. The Venezuelan Government has the capacity to respond to emergencies,
and has provided assistance to many other countries in cases of emergency. It ha s also
incorporated risk management into the national basic education curriculum. However,
Venezuela is a country vulnerable to emergency situations caused by natural disasters,
especially torrential rains and earthquakes. A significant proportion of the p opulation
lives in the communities very vulnerable to earthquakes, floods and landslides.
10. Venezuela has been moving towards consolidating a political and
socioeconomic model that entails a process of wide-ranging structural change. The
“social missions and grand social missions” are programmes aimed at restoring
people’s rights, especially for the most vulnerable social groups, and they have
promoted transformation of the process of formulating and implementing public
policies in the country. Social investment, which represents more than 62.5 per cent
of tax revenues and approximately 18 per cent of GDP, has been given priority since
1999 as a mechanism for income redistribution and social justice. The highest priority
has been placed on the education, social security and health sectors. Between 2009
and 2014, the Venezuelan Government promulgated legislation concerning children
and women in the following areas: youth, videos, war games, education, civil registry,
citizen security, protection of the family and children, racial discrimination, sports
and recreation, maternity and paternity, corporate social responsibility, emergency
shelters, and integrated risk management.
11. In 2012, Venezuela submitted three reports to the Committee on the Rights of
the Child, and these will be discussed in 2014. Many of the 63 recommendations made
by the Committee on the second country report (2007) remain valid. They i nclude the
following: (a) strengthen the protection system; (b) prevent and eradicate violence
against children, in line with the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s study on
violence against children; (c) universalize birth registration; (d) apply international
standards for juvenile justice; (e) encourage the establishment of mechanisms for the
participation of children and adolescents; (f) prepare a plan of action for children; (g)
make visible investments in children; (h) universalize education and health services;
(i) strengthen information systems on children’s rights; and (j) enhance civil soc iety
participation. The Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women have both made recommendations
concerning adolescent pregnancy and the minimum legal ages for marriage (14 years
for females and 16 for males).

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation, 20092014
(a)

Key results achieved
12. The cooperation programme helped provide national policymakers with data and
analyses on key issues concerning children. Information is now in hand, in some cases
disaggregated by sex, on violence against adolescents in the schools, maternal
breastfeeding in public hospitals, human milk banks, learning outcomes in

5

mathematics, reading and writing, demographic dynamics and reproductive health,
and the behaviour of young people with respect to HIV. DevInfo has been used to
disseminate national statistics (INEInfo and CensusInfo). The 2011 census included
for the first time self-identification of the Afro-descendent population, and provides
data disaggregated by ethnic origin. Education statistics, data from the civil registry
of births and malaria surveillance statistics have improved the quality and timeliness
of information, although challenges remain. At the local level, there is now fo r the
first time a municipal index on children’s rights, which includes a methodology for
measuring participation.
13. With the help of UNICEF, the child protection system now includes
programmes, standards and protocols for the prevention and treatment of violence in
accordance with international standards. Protocols are available on minimum
standards for police work with child victims, witnesses and delinquents. The country
applies a policy of inspection and surveillance over administrative and judicial
protection institutions. It has established compulsory legal standards for all Child
Protection Tribunals concerning the right to be heard and express views,
administration of the means of support, the supervised family living regime and the
preparation of interviews and technical reports and testimony by children in judicial
proceedings. Judges decide family mediation cases in accordance with national
legislation. Violence prevention in urban areas focused on adolescent development
has been incorporated into social programmes in the three municipalities with high
population densities in Caracas and has been replicated in one municipality in the
state of Zulia.
14. In the education system, UNICEF has supported the incorporation of contents
based on human rights principles. Initial, primary and secondary education now have
curriculum guidelines, educational materials and a teacher training plan on the
following issues: human rights education, with an emphasis on interculturalism,
gender equality and adolescent development; integrated risk management; the
teaching of reading, writing and mathematics; and intercultural bilingual education.
For the first time, 30 per cent of community day-care centres staffed with mothers
who were not originally professionally trained caregivers have now trained their staff
and are applying the more systematic pedagogical methodology. The Catholic school
system in five priority states is now providing instruction on human rights, and
regulations governing the school social environment have been updated. Intercultural
bilingual education is offered in the schools of six indigenous ethnic groups, and has
resulted in the strengthening of the work of indigenous adolescent and youth
networks. Contents dealing with self-identification and recognition of Afrodescendent culture have been incorporated into the national reading plan and into the
policy guidelines for intercultural education. Educational offerings have been
expanded with postgraduate courses on key topics relating to childhood and
adolescence: the rights of indigenous peoples, breastfeeding, intercultural bilingual
education, juvenile violence, and human rights in the school setting.
15. In national policy, priority has been given to reducing neonatal mortality and
encouraging breastfeeding, as well as promoting adolescent health, with an emphasis
on the most excluded population, in the context of “A Promise Renewed”. The
protocols dealing with neonatal care and adolescent health were developed in
cooperation with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) and UNICEF. The country has a national team of
specialists accredited as facilitators in providing essential care for the newborn,

6

obstetrical emergencies, neonatal resuscitation, breastfeeding, and adolescent health.
With respect to breastfeeding, the National Paediatrics Society has updated its
professional ethics code in accordance with national legislation and international
standards: 30 per cent of paediatricians and all universit y faculty who are responsible
for the coordination of postgraduate programmes in 10 priority states are now familiar
with the standards; courses for mothers and professionals, accredited by the
Government and UNICEF, are now permanently available, free of charge. In
collaboration with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
with UNFPA and with PAHO, a National Strategic Plan for HIV Prevention 2012 2016 has been prepared, and gives priority to a childhood and adolescence agenda.
(b)

Lessons learned
16. The midterm review and the Country Programme 2009 -2014 review have
offered important inputs for identifying lessons learned.
17. The priority accorded breastfeeding in health policy, as well as neonatal care
and adolescent health protocols, showed that in order to have real impact on public
policies there must be an ongoing analysis of risks, based on evidence and conducted
with strategic partners from Government and society.
18. Experience acquired through violence prevention and adolescent development
programmes in urban communities showed that, if local interventions are to be
successful, there must first be a programmatic and political roadmap that incorporates
systematization and evaluation with a view to scaling up, replicating or adapt ing
experiments. To have an impact on public policies with an equity focus targeted at
indigenous peoples, Afro-descendents and the most excluded urban communities
implies considering their priorities; contextualizing strategies; respecting their
agendas and their pace and timing; and promoting dialogue and the real exchange of
knowledge.

The country programme 2015-2019
(a)

Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

850

2 000

2 850

Education

1 300

3 000

4 300

Protection

1 700

4 000

5 700

Health and nutrition

Cross-sectoral
Total

(b)

420

1 000

1 420

4 270

10 000

14 270

Preparation process
19. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for 20152019 was prepared through collaboration between the Government (led by the
Planning Ministry) and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and
represented the first step in preparing the Country Programme Document (CPD).

7

20. This CPD was prepared on the basis of the priorities set forth in the National
Plan (Plan de la Patria), the UNDAF, the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014-2017 and the
recommendations issued by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. It was put to prior
consultation with principal governmental bodies, selected sectors of civil society, and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
(c)

Programme components, results and strategies
21. By 2019, UNICEF will have contributed to the implementation of public
policies and the generation of evidence to guarantee social inclusion and equity in the
exercise of children’s rights to health, nutrition, education and a life free of violence.
Consistent with the priorities established in the UNDAF, the programme will
contribute to policies aimed at: (a) promoting and protecting breastfeeding and
complementary feeding, as well as prevention of the vertical transmission of HIV,
neonatal mortality, and adolescent pregnancy; (b) reinforcing the quality and cultural
relevance of education; (c) addressing violence, including gender-based violence, and
promoting good treatment and a culture of peace.
22. The programme includes three components: (a) health and nutrition; (b) educatio n;
and (c) protection. It will focus on the principal standards of human rights and gender
equality in order to address vulnerabilities and reduce geographic, social, ethnic and
gender disparities.
23. The strategies for the three components involve: (a) strengthening capacities of
Government institutions and social organizations in the planning, execution and
monitoring of policies and programmes for children and adolescents with a gender
focus; (b) advocacy, policy dialogue, communication, knowledge manag ement, and
generation of evidence for placing children’s rights in the forefront of policies and
programmes at the national level and in prioritized municipalities where there is a
high degree of social exclusion; (c) strategic partnerships with various le vels of
Government, civil society organizations, the private sector and children, as well as
support for integration and intersectoral linkages between Government, society and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in order to respond more effective ly
to reduce violence against children, provide neonatal care, and prevent the vertical
transmission of HIV and adolescent pregnancy; (d) identifying, promoting and
exchanging experiences of effective innovations with an equity focus that will help
to improve the quality of education concerning equity and the protection of children
against violence, including gender violence, and disseminating them through a
horizontal collaboration framework among countries.

(i)

Health and nutrition
24. In accordance with the UNDAF 2015-2019, by 2019 UNICEF will have helped
provide access for pregnant women and the most excluded children to health and
nutrition programmes and services of better quality and relevance, particularly in the
areas of neonatal care, prevention of the vertical transmission of HIV, promotion and
protection of exclusive breastfeeding and complementary feeding, and prevention and
care of adolescent pregnancy.
25. UNICEF will support operation of health centres under the “child -friendly
hospitals initiative” and will promote appropriate, safe and properly administered
supplementary feeding. For application of the neonatal care protocols and standards

8

for the prevention of vertical transmission of HIV and prevention and care of
adolescent pregnancy, it will continue its joint work with PAHO, UNFPA and
UNAIDS. A key aspect will be to generate evidence for influencing policies and
programmes on priority topics.
(ii)

Education
26. In accordance with the UNDAF 2015-2019, by the year 2019 UNICEF will have
helped to ensure that the most excluded children attend and remain in the education
system through the end of secondary school. UNICEF will help improve the quality
of instruction and pedagogical contents with a focus on human rights, gender,
adolescent development and interculturalism.
27. UNICEF will support development of a high-quality, relevant and gendersensitive education system as well as the implementation of intercultural bilingual
education, and will help ensure that the education system has information for
monitoring educational quality, relevance and equity with data disaggregated by
ethnic origin, place of residence, sex and age.

(iii)

Protection
28. In accordance with the UNDAF 2015-2019, by the year 2019, UNICEF will
have helped ensure that children and families in the priority municipalities of the
country have access to enhanced programmes and services to care for the victims of
violence, including gender-based violence; care for adolescents in conflict with the
law; promote a culture of peace and good treatment; and ensure the timely registration
of births among indigenous populations and in isolated communities. To this end, it
will draw upon relevant and high quality monitoring systems and statistical
information.
29. UNICEF will support the national child protection system and other institutions
in implementing and monitoring intersectoral action plans to prevent and address
violence, including gender-based violence, especially in the home, school and
community settings, through timely and quality responses. It will also contribute to
implementing a plan for a civil registry of births, intended to reduce the gaps in
priority geographic areas. It will promote the generation of evidence with an equity
focus as a key tool for policymakers in the area of child protection.

(iv)

Cross-sectoral component
30. This component of the programme will support effective and efficient systems of
governance and results-based management of the Office. The intersectoral component
includes all activities in support of the country programme’s overall management, as
well as the monitoring and personnel with intersectoral functions, administration and
finance, communications and fund-raising.

(d)

Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
31. The country programme is aligned with the “Plan de la Patria 2013-2019”,
specifically with two objectives that contain the relevant targets relating to children
in the areas of integrated protection, gender equity, education, health, nutrition, social
inclusion, community participation, institutional reform, knowledge management and
monitoring. As well, the country programme responds to the UNDAF in five of the

9

six areas of cooperation that have been agreed with the national Government and that
are aligned with national priorities.
(e)

Relationship to international priorities
32. The country programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. It also takes into account recent reports submitted by the country to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, and the recommendations from previous reports of
those committees. Venezuela has signed the pledge to “A Promise Renewed”. The
programme fits within the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014 -2017 and responds to the
country’s commitment to accelerate the achievement of the MDGs even after 2015,
particularly for those goals that have not been reached. It wi ll also contribute to the
Educational Goals 2021, signed by the Government at the twentieth Ibero -American
Summit, held in Mar del Plata.

Major partnerships
33. UNICEF will continue and reinforce its current partnerships with the national
Government, universities, civil society organizations, scientific societies, the media,
the private sector and children themselves. The Ministry of Planning is responsible
for overall coordination of the country programme and for inter-ministerial
coordination in monitoring the outcomes. The principal agencies with which the
programme will cooperate are the Vice-Presidency for the Social Area and the line
ministries (Health, Education, Penitentiary Services, Food, the Interior, Justice and
Peace, Indigenous Peoples, Communes and Social Participation); the Viceministerio
para la Suprema Felicidad Social (“Vice-Ministry for Supreme Social Happiness”),
the National Statistics Institute, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Ombudsperson’s
Office, the National Institute for Children’s Rights (IDENNA), the National Elections
Council, selected state and municipal governments, and indigenous and youth
organizations.
34. UNICEF will coordinate closely on programme planning with resident and nonresident agencies, funds and programmes. For the health and nutrition component, in
particular, pursuant to the local Letter of Understanding signed with UNFPA and
PAHO, it will continue coordination and joint programming with participation by
UNAIDS.
35. Given that Venezuela is an upper-middle-income country, UNICEF will
prioritize local fund-raising through individual donations and corporate partnerships.

Programme supervision, evaluation and management
36. During the first two years of the cooperation cycle, priority will be given to
generating baselines and information systems for monitoring progress and i dentifying
barriers and bottlenecks that are impeding the achievement of better results for children,
especially the most excluded. The programme will support strengthening of the National
Statistics System, in particular its administrative registry, in order to improve the
disaggregation, timeliness and accessibility of information. The applicat ion of
mechanisms for monitoring the outcomes expected under programme components

10

will also be a priority. The mechanisms will include field visits and periodic partner
reports. These actions will have priority in both the five -year and annual integrated
monitoring and evaluation plans. Efforts will be made to harmonize methodologies
and indicators more closely with international standards. The collaboration of the
National Statistics Institute will be essential. The programme will coordinate support
that the Government deems appropriate in the area of emergencies, humanitarian
assistance and institutional strengthening for disaster risk reduction. The Office will
coordinate efforts with national authorities and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in the United Nations Emergency Technical Team framework, in order
to obtain information rapidly that will give visibility to the situation of children
affected and will contribute to decision-making.
37. The Office will conduct midyear and annual reviews of the work plans and the
management of the country programme and will coordinate reviews and
programmatic evaluations with national partners that are helping to implement the
programme, in close coordination with the Planning Ministry.
38. An analysis of the situation of children and women will be planned for 2017, in
coordination with the partners, as key input for preparing the next country
programme. Each year the Office will update the key indicators for monitoring the
situation of children, as input for the Situation Analysis.

11

