Viet Nam
Common country programme document
2012-2016

The draft common country programme document for
Viet Nam (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2011/VNM/1) was presented
to the Executive Board for discussion and comments at its 2011
second regular session (12-15 September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Contents
Page

I.

Introduction....................................................................................................................................... 3

II.

Situation analysis .............................................................................................................................. 3

III.

Past cooperation and lessons learned................................................................................................. 6

IV.

Proposed programme......................................................................................................................... 7

V.

Programme management, monitoring and evaluation ...................................................................... 10

Annexes
I.

UNDP results and resources framework .......................................................................................... 12

II.

UNFPA results and resources framework ........................................................................................ 16

III.

UNICEF summary results matrix, including the indicative budget .................................................. 19

2

I. Introduction
1.
For the 2006-2011 programme cycle, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF (hereinafter
referred to as the three organizations) developed individual country programme
documents, supported by organization-based country programme action plans.
However, for the 2012-2016 programme cycle, the three organizations and the
Government of Viet Nam have developed a draft common country programme
document, within the context of the United Nations ‘delivering as one’ initiative.
This initiative seeks to ensure greater programme efficie ncy by improving
harmonization and by simplifying United Nations procedures. UNDP, UNFPA and
UNICEF will therefore submit one common country programme document to their
respective Executive Boards for the 2012-2016 programme cycle.
2.
The common country programme document will be fully aligned with the One
Plan, 2012-2016, which is being finalized. Each organization will contribute to the
outputs of the One Plan through specific interventions, which will be measured by
indicators. The outputs will be in line with the mandate and comparative advantages
of each organization.
3.
The draft common country programme document contains a resource and
results framework for each of the three organizations. The results and resources
framework identifies each organization’s comparative advantages at the One Plan
outcome and output levels and includes indicative budgets. The One Plan will outline
the details of the programme interventions and the programme management of the
three organizations. Therefore, the three organizations will not prepare country
programme action plans.

II. Situation analysis
4.
In 2010, Viet Nam attained middle-income country status, placing it among the
countries that have achieved medium human development. Over the past two
decades, Viet Nam has achieved rapid economic growth and reduced overall poverty
rates, from 58.1 per cent in 1993 to 14.5 per cent in 2008, thereby raising the living
standards of the population.
5.
The country is on track to meet, or has met, a majority of the Millenniu m
Development Goals at the national level. National institutions are more experienced
and mature after two decades of doimoi (renovation) reform, with increased national
engagement and participation, in particular by the National Assembly and the media.
6.
Viet Nam is also increasingly engaged in global and regional institutions. It
acceded to the World Trade Organization in 2007, was a non-permanent member of
the United Nations Security Council from 2008-2009, and chaired the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations in 2010.
7.
Yet, like other middle-income countries that have achieved rapid growth and
reduced poverty, Viet Nam faces a number of challenges. The Socio-economic
Development Strategy, 2011-2020, and an independent analysis by the United
Nations acknowledged these challenges. The transformation of the national economic
structure has highlighted the need to achieve better quality, sustainable growth and
ensure a balance between economic growth and social, human and sustainable

3

development goals so that all citizens, including the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged, can benefit from the development process.
8.
Viet Nam has high and persistent poverty rates among some population groups.
In 2008, the poverty rate among ethnic minorities was 50.3 per cent, c ompared to 8.9
per cent for the Kinh/Hoa majority. The 2010 Millennium Development Goals report
pointed out that Viet Nam faces a number of emerging challenges, including urban
poverty and poverty among migrants. The multidimensional nature of poverty in Viet
Nam requires new approaches to reduce and measure poverty. According to the 2008
Viet Nam Household and Living Standards Survey, the monetary child poverty rate
was 20.7 per cent, and the multidimensional child poverty rate was 28.9 per cent.
9.
The country is undergoing a demographic transformation. The working-age
population is peaking, offering a ‘demographic bonus’, accompanied by the ageing
of the population and a rapidly increasing sex ratio at birth. According to the 2009
census, that ratio was 110 boys to 100 girls.
10. Viet Nam faces the challenge of ensuring inclusive, equitable and sustainable
growth, and generating decent, better-paid jobs for people of working age, including
the hundreds of thousands of labour market entrants seeking work each year. These
challenges will require increased skills and productivity, and a regionally balanced
approach to development that will provide access to employment opportunities for
people where they live.
11. Another emerging challenge in Viet Nam is its vulne rability to the adverse
effects of climate change. Natural and climatic stresses are increasing, and the
country faces a rapid increase in energy demand, greenhouse gas emissions, and
associated pollution and costs. Sustainable development and an effective response to
climate change require efforts to reduce environmental degradation, as well as
scaled-up ‘green’ production and the promotion of energy-efficient, sustainable
business models and economic development. There is a need for effective disaster risk management and reduction efforts to make sectors, regions, communities,
households and individuals resilient to environmental stresses and hazards.
12. The Socio-economic Development Strategy and Plan identifies the need to
develop a highly skilled population and to ensure access to social services and social
security for all Vietnamese people. A more progressive and inclusive social
protection system is needed. Such a system could serve as the foundation for future
economic growth and prosperity by providing universal protection for all citizens
when they experience crises – be they environmental, economic, health-related or
personal.
13. A universal approach to social protection must replace the current, complex
system of social protection programmes in order to address persistent poverty and
emerging forms of vulnerability and disadvantage, and equip the country to manage
and respond to rapid socio-economic and demographic change. With over one third
of the population under 19 years of age, the country must improve the health and
education of all children and adolescents, particularly boys and girls living in
persistent poverty, and those belonging to ethnic minority groups.
14. The system of social services, including basic services such as health and
education, needs to rapidly modernize and evolve to meet changing needs and
expectations, and to ensure equitable access to high-quality services for all citizens.

4

Disparities persist in accessing essential services, such as health and education,
among regions and population groups. By 2015, Viet Nam will achieve most of the
Millennium Development Goals at the national level. However, some groups,
including migrants, ethnic minorities and the poor, lag behind. The
commercialization and privatization of social services, limited accountability and
oversight, and inefficient public investment have undermined equitable access to
services for all people, and have exacerbated inequalities and disparities.
15. While Viet Nam has made progress towards achieving gender equality and
ensuring universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support, disparities
remain, including at the subnational level and in rural and remote areas. Gender
inequality persists, including in the labour market, where women are concent rated in
the informal sector, and in decision-making, where women are less well represented,
particularly at the local level. Gender inequality also exists in households, where a
strong preference for sons and domestic violence reinforce gender relations a nd
norms. A 2010 General Statistics Office survey found that domestic violence affects
a third of women in Viet Nam during their lifetimes.
16. Concerted action by all stakeholders, together with increased awareness and
capacity of rights holders and duty bearers, is required to realize gender-equality
commitments. Greater investment is needed to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals for all people. Viet Nam lags behind in its efforts to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 6 (on combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases), and
Millennium Development Goal 7 (on ensuring environmental sustainability).
17. Viet Nam is a country in transition, engaged in a process of institutional
reform. The Socio-economic Development Strategy acknowledges the importance of
reform in governance. Viet Nam needs modern institutions that are able to respond to
and manage the complex challenges and changes the country will face in the next
five to 10 years. Continued reform and modernization of policy development
processes; stronger and more effective national and subnational institutions;
enhanced parliamentary development and oversight; more determined, informed and
focused efforts to combat corruption; and greater participation by all stakeholders
and citizens in policymaking, planning and monitoring performance at all levels are
required.
18. The Socio-economic Development Strategy, 2011-2020, states the need to
enhance capacity and establish mechanisms for people to exercise and master their
right to direct democracy, so as to promote vigorously all creative capabilities and
guarantee a high degree of consensus in society, thereby generating a driving force
for national development. The Strategy seeks to strengthen the participation of all
citizens to ensure better, more effective and more accountable and transparent
governance, so that all Vietnamese people have a say in the decisions that affect
them and fully realize their choices and capabilities.
19. A more supportive regulatory environment is required for greater engagement
of political, social, professional and mass organizations in decision -making
processes, service delivery and policy dialogue. The rule of law needs to be
strengthened, so that all people, institutions and entities are accountable to laws that
are equally enforced and independently adjudicated. There is also a need to ensure
access to justice for all citizens, in particular the most vulnerable and disadvantaged,
who rely on the law to protect them from stigma and disadvantage. This, together

5

with increased engagement by the Government in implementing human rights
treaties, will also contribute towards strengthening the rule of law.

III. Past cooperation and lessons learned
20. This section outlines past cooperation and lessons learned under the ‘delivering
as one’ initiative piloted in Viet Nam. The One Plan, 2006-2011, embodied the
commitment of United Nations organizations in Viet Nam to ‘delivering as one’. It
was led by the Government and had the support of the donor community. The One
Plan, 2006-2011, which included 14 participating organizations, provided an
overarching programmatic framework for the work of the United Nations in Viet
Nam. The One Plan management plan defined the coordination mechanisms that
supported and implemented the Plan.
21. An independent, country-led evaluation conducted in 2010 found that the
United Nations in Viet Nam had made impressive progress towards ‘delivering as
one’ over the period of the One Plan, 2006-2011. The evaluation noted a shift
towards high-quality policy work and the establishment of United NationsGovernment programme coordination groups to coordinate the implementation of the
Plan. The evaluation found that the programme coordination groups created an
opportunity for improved performance. Cross-cutting issues, especially those related
to gender, human rights and HIV, received increased attention.
22. According to the evaluation, the policy dialogue and advocacy role of the
United Nations has been strengthened, in line with the role of the United Nations in
supporting the implementation of international norms and standards. One leader, the
vision and ambition of the United Nations country team, and the support of one
communications team contributed to this strengthening.
23. Additional achievements include the tripartite governance structure developed
in Viet Nam, which has been effective in ensuring reform led by the Government and
in engaging donors. The One Plan fund has enabled a more flexible allocation of
funds at the country level. The United Nations has also sought to harmonize business
practices. Once built, the ‘green’ One United Nations house in Ha Noi will
demonstrate the commitment of the United Nations to ‘delivering as one’, ensuring
environmental sustainability and addressing climate change.
24. The independent, country-led evaluation identified the need to build on
achievements and demonstrate a more explicit approach to reform by:
(a) harmonizing the next One Plan with national planning cycles; (b) identifying th e
comparative advantages of United Nations organizations; and (c) adopting a more
systematic approach to policy work, together with a more explicit justification for
service-delivery work and support to policy implementation.
25. The evaluation also identified sustainability concerns, including those related
to providing resources for the One Plan and ensuring the empowerment of the
Resident Coordinator as one leader; demonstrating efficiencies and cost
effectiveness, as well as development results; improving harmonization of business
practices; and ensuring the sustainability of the one communications team.
26. Lessons learned from developing and implementing the One Plan, 2006 -2011,
highlighted in the evaluation, have influenced the development of the One Plan,

6

2012-2016, as well as its content. The new One Plan represents a departure from the
previous One Plan, which was based on the country cooperation plans and
frameworks of individual organizations. The new One Plan represents a single
framework for participating United Nations organizations in Viet Nam and a joint
programme of work, based on the comparative advantages of participating
organizations.
27. The One Plan represents the joint priorities and focus areas of the United
Nations in Viet Nam. It signifies a shift towards high-quality policy work designed to
support the Government in addressing and managing the challenges associated with
middle-income country status, and emphasizes high-quality technical assistance,
capacity development at national and subnational levels, and the United Nations role
in convening stakeholders and expanding partnerships.
28. The Government and the United Nations developed the plan jointly from an
overall conceptual framework. It includes jointly identified focus areas, outcomes,
outputs and indicators. The programming documents of participating United Nations
organizations are based on the draft One Plan.
29. The process for developing the Plan was participatory, and involved key
stakeholders from the Government, donor organizations and political, social,
professional and mass organizations. These stakeholders were fully engaged in the
development of focus areas, outcomes and outputs.
30. The Plan was also based on an in-depth analysis that included: (a) an
independent, joint country analysis commissioned by the United Nations and a like minded donor group in Viet Nam; (b) the independent, country-led evaluation; and
(c) United Nations analytical work that outlined the development challenges Viet
Nam will face over the period of the One Plan. The Plan identifies the key
interventions of the United Nations in Viet Nam during the next five years, in
response to the national priorities established in the Socio -economic Development
Strategy, 2011-2020, and the draft Socio-economic Development Plan, 2011-2015.

IV. Proposed programme
31. Because Viet Nam is a middle-income country, it requires best-practice, highquality policy advice on how to respond to the challenges associated with its middle income status, including widening inequalities and disparities, and persistent poverty
in specific regions and population groups. The United Nations is well placed to
provide such policy advice and access to international best practices, and to help the
Government bridge the policy-implementation gap. For example, the United Nations
can assist in conducting targeted policy research, pilot innovative interventions and
responses that can be scaled up, and present costed policy options to decision
makers.
32. As a result of the global financial crisis, overseas development assistance is
declining, and Viet Nam’s shift to middle-income country status will result in
adjustments in future aid. Some donors have indicated that they intend to scale down
or end their assistance. However, Viet Nam would benefit from ongoing support
from development partners if it is to continue to progress and address the challenges
associated with middle-income country status. Although the United Nations
contributed less than 1.5 per cent of the estimated $7.9 billion in aid pledged t o Viet

7

Nam in 2010, it is uniquely placed to help the Government leverage resources, using
its convening power and normative role to ensure that resources are utilized
effectively and in the interests of Vietnamese citizens.
33. Within this context, the United Nations, in collaboration with the Government,
development partners and political, social, professional and mass organizations, has
identified the following comparative advantages, which it seeks to maximize over the
period of the One Plan. This also entails continued strategic engagement with
multilateral organizations to deliver complementary roles, including in the areas of
economic transformation and institutional reform, social protection, sustainable
development and participatory governance. The United Nations in Viet Nam will:
(a)
Use its convening power to bring together stakeholders and provide
coordination, including on critical cross-cutting issues such as gender equality, HIV,
climate change and human rights-based approaches to development;
(b)
Provide policy advice, in particular on strategic issues and in line with
international norms and standards, including support to integrate those norms and standards
into national legislative and policy frameworks and monitor their implementation and
impact on beneficiaries. The United Nations will draw on the collective global assets of the
United Nations system to provide technical expertise and promote the exchange of
knowledge based on international best practices. It will also support innovative approaches
to human and social development issues and the implementation of global normative
standards;
(c)
Advocate and help to ensure that the voices of the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged are heard, and issues related to inequality are addressed in national policy
processes. .
(d)
Facilitate a multisectoral approach and help the Government to coordinate its
response to complex issues such as climate change, social protection, sustainable
development, a multidimensional approach to poverty reduction, HIV, governance and
gender equality, all of which require a cross-agency approach;
(e)
Maximize the comparative advantages and added value it offers as a
multilateral organization that is ‘delivering as one’, capitalizing on a multidimensional
approach to support the Government on cross-government, multisectoral issues and
challenges over the coming years, as well as to support improved coordination and
coherence between the Government and stakeholders in response to these challenges.
34. During the period covered by the One Plan, the United Nations will work with the
Government and people of Viet Nam to ensure a balance between economic, human and
sustainable development objectives. It will help the Government achieve inclusive,
equitable and sustainable growth, access to high-quality, essential services and social
protection, and enhanced governance and participation. The draft common country
programme document is aligned with the focus areas and outcomes of the One Plan. Using
their comparative advantages and working within their mandates, the three organizations
will work with the Government to develop programmes to respond to these outcomes.
35. In the area of inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth (focus area one), the United
Nations will focus on the following outcomes by 2016:

8

(a)
Outcome 1.1: Key national institutions formulate and monitor peoplecentred, ‘green’ and evidence-based socio-economic development policies to ensure
the quality of growth in Viet Nam as a middle-income country;
(b)
Outcome 1.2: Institutions create opportunities for decent work for
people of working age, particularly the most vulnerable and disadvantaged, to benefit
from the process of socio-economic transformation;
(c)
Outcome 1.3: Key national and subnational agencies, in partnership
with the private sector and communities, have established and monitor multisectoral
strategies, mechanisms and resources to support the implementation of relevant
multilateral agreements and effectively address climate change adaptation, mitigation
and disaster-risk management;
(d)
Outcome 1.4: Key national and subnational agencies, in partnership
with the private sector and communities, implement and monitor laws, policies and
programmes for more efficient use of natural resources and environmental
management, and to implement commitments under international conventions.
36. In the area of access to quality essential services and social protection (focus
area two), the United Nations will focus on the following outcomes by 2016:
(a)
Outcome 2.1: A more effective national social protection system
provides increased coverage, quality, and equitable access for the most vulnerable
and disadvantaged groups;
(b)
Outcome 2.2: Increased quality and effective management of a
comprehensive national health system, including health promotion and health
protection, with a focus on ensuring more equitable access for the most vulnerable
and disadvantaged groups;
(c)
Outcome 2.3: Increased quality and effective management of education
and training systems, and increased access to pre-primary, primary and continuing
education, particularly for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups;
(d)
Outcome 2.4: National and subnational institutions, in partnership with
communities, more actively address inequalities through the implementation and
monitoring of laws, policies and programmes that promote gender equality and
women’s empowerment, and an effective and sustainable response to HIV, reducing
stigma and discrimination.
37. In the area of enhancing governance and participation (focus area three), the
United Nations will focus on the following outcomes by 2016:
(a)
Outcome 3.1: Elected bodies are better able to formulate laws, oversee
the performance of state agencies and represent the aspirations of the Vietnamese
people, especially women, ethnic minorities and other vulnerable and disadvantaged
groups;
(b)
Outcome 3.2: All citizens, particularly the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged groups, benefit from strengthened legal and judicial reform and
increased access to justice, enhanced capacity of legal and judicial professionals, and

9

strengthened national legal frameworks to
international conventions ratified by Viet Nam;

support the

implementation of

(c)
Outcome 3.3: Improved performance of public-sector institutions at
national and subnational levels, through enhanced coordination, accountability,
transparency and anti-corruption efforts, will reduce disparities and ensure access to
public services for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups;
(d)
Outcome 3.4: Political, social, professional and mass organizations
participate effectively in policy discussions and decision-making processes for the
benefit of the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups.
38. The United Nations will provide high-quality policy advice and support to the
Government, using its convening role and ensuring coordination on cross -sectoral
issues and challenges. The United Nations will take a policy-oriented, targeted
approach to reduce inequalities and disparities, including disparities in wealth, in
access to opportunities and services, and among different regions and socio economic groups, focusing on those who are most vulnerable and disadvantaged.
39. The United Nations will integrate a human rights-based approach into all
programming, and will promote gender equality, women’s empowerment and
culturally appropriate programming in its interventions. The United Nations will take
a cross-sectoral approach to development challenges, and will continue its support
for government efforts to strengthen South-South and triangular cooperation.
40. The total indicative budget for the One Plan is $478.655 million, of which
$90.243 million is from regular resources. The aggregated indicative budget of
UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF is $253.51 million, of which $84.715 million is from
regular resources and $168.795 million is from other resources.

V. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
41. During the period covered by the One Plan, 2012-2016, the United Nations in
Viet Nam will further refine the programme management practices developed during
the previous One Plan. The tripartite governance structure of the One Plan highlights
the way the United Nations works in partnership with the Government and the donor
community. This structure will provide continued leadership and oversight for the
next One Plan.
42. In line with the Paris Declaration and the Hanoi Core Statement on Aid
Effectiveness, the three organizations have agreed to support the objective of the
national implementation modality as agreed in the harmonized programme and
project management guidelines. The Government and the United Nations will def ine
coordination mechanisms and management arrangements in line with the One Plan
2012-2016. The details of programme management are being developed in chapter V
of the draft One Plan, 2012-2016, in consultation with the Government and donors.
Risk management will be addressed through established procedures, including a
macro assessment of the public financial management system in Viet Nam as well as
micro assessments of implementing partners, as outlined in the One Plan. Resources
will be mobilized at the country level under the oversight and management of the
One Plan Fund Mobilization and Allocation Committee, usi ng agreed criteria to
prioritize and allocate funds. The One Plan describes how the One Plan will be

10

implemented, including partnership arrangements and the respective responsibilities
of the Government and the United Nations.
43. The United Nations in Viet Nam is committed to strengthening management for
results and will make greater use of evaluations to measure the impact of supported
programmes in Viet Nam. The Government and the United Nations have developed a
robust results framework for the One Plan, whereby results can be clearly attributed
to United Nations interventions. The independent, country-led evaluation provides a
baseline for monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the ‘delivering as
one’ initiative in Viet Nam.
44. During the period covered by the One Plan, the United Nations will further
strengthen its capacity and develop additional tools and methods to report on the
impact of its policy advice and advocacy. The United Nations is committed to
evaluating the results of the One Plan, and has established a joint evaluation
framework and monitoring and evaluation calendar for the period 2012 -2016. A
detailed monitoring and evaluation matrix is included as an annex to the One Plan.

11

12

Annex I
UNDP results and resources framework for Viet Nam

UN One Plan focus area 1: inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth
One Plan outcome: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4
Outcome indicators: (1) Proportion of people living below the national poverty line ( general poverty rate), (2) Gap between average monthly
income per capita of the richest quintile and poorest quintile (disaggregated by sex of household head, urban/rural, region), (3) CO2 emissions, total,
per capita and per USD1 GDP (PPP), (4) Percentage of GDP loss due to weather related disasters, and (5) Proportion of land area covered by forest
Related UNDP strategic plan focus areas: poverty reduction, Millennium Development Goals achievement, climate change, sustainable
development, and disaster risk management

Partners

UNDP contributions

Ministries of Planning
and Investment,
Finance; Foreign
Affairs, Labour,
Invalids and Social
Affairs, Natural
Resources and
Environment,
Agriculture and Rural
Development, Trade
and Industry;
Committee for Ethnic
Minority Affairs;
Academy of Social
Sciences, committees
and institutes and
Office of the National
Assembly (NA); Party
agencies; selected
provinces; United
Nations agencies and

Support socio-economic
development strategy (SEDS)
people-centred approach
through policy advice and
technical assistance.
Support statistical
development strategy,
including gender
disaggregated data production
and dissemination.
MDG monitoring and
reporting will promote
evidence-based policies and
enhance role of Viet Nam in
South-South cooperation.
Contribute to accelerating
poverty reduction in poorest
areas, for women and among
ethnic minorities, promoting a
multidimensional approach to
poverty.

Indicators, baselines and targets for
UNDP contributions
Indicator: Number of UNDP
recommendations incorporated into policy
and institutional frameworks and action
plans for implementation of the SEDS
and national long-term climate change,
disaster risk management and
environment protection strategies.
Baseline: SEDS adopted in January 2011,
national long-term climate change,
disaster risk management and
environment protection strategies
formulated; policy and institutional
frameworks and action plans for
implementation developed starting in
2011.
Target: By end 2016, policy and
institutional frameworks and action plans
adopted and operationalized with UNDP
programme and project support.
Indicator: National climate change strategy

Indicative One Plan
outputs (as per draft
results matrix of October
2011)
Strategic options for
development policies
defined and considered
by policymakers to
promote inclusive, green,
people-centred, equitable
development. (Output
1.1.2)
Planning and investment
processes climate
proofed and specific
programmes formulated
and operationalized 1 for
long-term adaptation to
reduce climate-change
vulnerabilities. (Output
1.3.1)
A national system for
Reduced Emissions from
Deforestation and forest
Degradation (REDD),

Indicative
resources (US
dollars)
Regular:
$16 million
Other:
$63.85 million

__________________
1

“Operationalized” refers to the process by which the United Nations, together with relevant duty bearers and right holders, identifies policy issues,
develops an appropriate policy response and provides assistance in executing the policies through , for example, guideline development, training of staff and
the establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems”.

donors

Develop capacity for climate
change planning and
financing, and support the
mainstreaming of climate
change adaptation and
mitigation into existing
policies and investment
regulations.
Support development of
capacity for natural resources
and environmental
management, including
formulation of national
REDD-plus programme and
enhancing resilience of at-risk
and vulnerable groups to
natural hazards.
Approach climate change and
environmental protection as
cross-cutting issues with
specific linkages to poverty
and gender.

and full monitoring, reporting and
verification system developed, approved by
Government and submitted to UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), while enabling environment for
long-term implementation developed.
Baseline: Government of Viet Nam is
committed to formulating climate-change
strategy and green-economy/low-carbon
development strategy.
Target: By end 2016, greeneconomy/low-carbon development
strategy and climate change strategy
developed and enacted.

and Nationally
Appropriate Mitigation
Actions (NAMAs) for a
number of strategically
chosen sectors and
localities are formulated
and operationalized with
clear potential benefits.
(Output 1.3.3)
Policies, plans and
technical skills are
strengthened for sound
management of
hazardous chemicals and
persistent organic
pollutants (POPs), in
accordance with
international
conventions. (Output
1.4.3)

UN One Plan focus area 2: access to quality essential services and social protection
One Plan outcome: 2.1
Outcome indicators: Number of beneficiaries receiving benefits from social assistance under Decree 67 and 13 on policy support for social
assistance beneficiaries (disaggregated by sex of beneficiary, ethnicity, migratory status, urban/rural, region)
Related UNDP strategic plan focus areas: social protection and gender equality
Ministries of Labour,
Invalids and Social
Affairs, Planning and
Investment, Finance,
Committee for Ethnic
Minority Affairs;
committees, institutes
and NA office; United
Nations agencies and
donors

Support the development of
an inclusive, progressive,
gender-sensitive and effective
social protection system and
the identification of evidencebased policy and financing
options for social protection.
Disaggregated data (by sex,
ethnicity and other key socioeconomic groups) and gender
analysis incorporated in
policy research and advice.

Indicator: Formulation and adoption of
alternative policy options prepared with
UNDP support for implementation of
national social protection strategy, and
coverage of social assistance provided to
the poor and vulnerable women and men.
Baseline: Social protection strategy
drafted.
Target: By end 2016, social assistance to
poor and most vulnerable harmonized and
coverage increased by 50%.

Alternative legal, policy,
targeting, and financing
options are available and
considered by the
Government for the
expansion of integrated
and adequate social
assistance, social
insurance and social
welfare and protection
services. (Output 2.1.3)

Regular:
$2 million
Other:
$3 million

13

14

One Plan focus area 3: governance and participation
One Plan outcomes: 3.1; 3.2; 3.3; 3.4
Outcome indicators: (1) Number of new laws that are accompanied by a written technical analysis on the impact of such laws on citizens,
particularly vulnerable and disadvantaged groups [outcome 3.1], and whose formulation included a formal consultation process with political, social,
professional and mass organizations [outcome 3.4], (2) Proportion of People’s Council members and number of Chairs or Vice -Chairs of People’s
Council who are women or from an ethnic minority group, (3) Number of citizens receiving free legal assis tance, (4) Proportion of Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) recommendations related to international conventions and the national legal framework accepted by Viet Nam that are
implemented, (5) Percentage of the population from the poorest quintile that has ac cess to public services (disaggregated by sex, ethnicity,
urban/rural, province), (6) Percentage of citizens using public services who experienced an act of corruption in the last 12 months.
Related UNDP strategic plan focus areas: democratic governance, gender equality
Committees;
institutes and
NA office;
Ministries of
Justice, Home
Affairs,
Foreign
Affairs,
Education and
Training;
Government
inspectors,
PSPMOs,
selected
provinces,
United Nations
agencies and
donors

Focus on capacity
development for:
(i) legislative research and
policy analysis, particularly
in NA committees;
(ii) development of public
consultations and public
hearings mechanisms; and
(iii) oversight, working with
NA committees on key policy
issues, budgetary processes
and gender-sensitive
budgeting.
Support leadership roles for
women in public sector and
elected bodies.
Support legal and judicial
reform through capacity
development, policy research
and advice, and coordination
support.
Strengthen access to justice
and protection of rights, in
particular for women, and
legal empowerment of the
poor.
Provide support to law
clinics, legal education, and
implementation of the
provisions of the UN
Convention against

Indicator: Guidelines and tools developed with
UNDP support for oversight reflecting rights and
needs of vulnerable groups.
Baseline: No comprehensive guidelines and tools
for oversight reflecting rights and needs of all
vulnerable groups.
Target: Guidelines developed and a set of tools
available for National Assembly and Provincial
People’s Council deputies.
Indicator: Number of recommendations of UPR,
and international treaty-monitoring mechanisms
adopted and implemented.
Baseline: UPR report, recommendations of treatymonitoring bodies.
Target: UNDP assistance provided to support the
implementation of UPR recommendations;
technical assistance on treaty-body reporting
processes for 2012-2016 and on consideration of
ratification of outstanding conventions.
Indicator: Number of UNDP policy
recommendations reflected in UNCAC review
follow-up action plan.
Baseline: Anti-corruption law adopted in 2005;
UNCAC ratified in 2009.
Target: UNCAC self-assessment with two chapters
of convention conducted by 2012; UNCAC review
follow-up action plan developed by 2013.
Indicator: Number of UNDP-supported policy
dialogues between PSPMOs and Government on

Elected bodies benefit
from enhanced
knowledge generation
and knowledge
management to access
high-quality research and
data to guide legislative
duties. (Output 3.1.1)
Policy, legal and
regulatory framework
strengthened to better
reflect the rights of the
most vulnerable groups,
and increase their access
to justice. (Output 3.2.1)
Selected National
Institutions have
enhanced capacities to
implement and monitor
implementation of
national legislation on
anti-corruption and key
provisions of the UN
Convention Against
Corruption (UNCAC).
(Output 3.3.3)
Enabling legal, policy
and institutional
framework and dialogue
mechanism available for
political, social

Regular:
$26.165
million
Other:
$29.345
million

Corruption (UNCAC).
Convene thematic policy
dialogues and support
participation of all
stakeholders in policy
discussions and decisionmaking processes.

legal and policy framework for PSPMOs.
Baseline: Insufficient policy dialogue between
Government and PSPMOs on policy and legal
framework.
Target: By 2012 new policy research available on
policy and legal environment for PSPMOs; two
policy dialogues conducted by 2016.

professional and mass
organizations (PSPMOs)
to participate in policy
discussion and decisionmaking processes.
(Output 3.4.1)

Resources for 2012-2016:
Regular: $44.165 million;
Other: $96.195 million;
Total: $140.36 million

15

16

Annex II
UNFPA results and resources framework for Viet Nam
One Plan focus area 1: inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth
One Plan outcome: 1.1
Selected One Plan outcome indicator: gap between average monthly income per capita of the richest quintile and poorest quintile
sex of household head, urban /rural, region)
Related UNFPA strategic plan focus area: population and development
Indicative One Plan outputs (as
Partners
UNFPA contributions
Indicators, baselines and targets
per draft results matrix of 7
for UNFPA contributions
October 2011)
Ministry of Planning
UNFPA will provide support
Indicator: Number of national
Strengthened capacities of data
and Investment;
to produce and use highsurveys and studies with data,
producers, providers and users for
selected people’s
quality, disaggregated data and disaggregated by age, sex and
evidence-based socio-economic
committees
policy research findings for
province, available for monitoring
development planning and
planning, monitoring and
progress towards achieving the
monitoring (Output 1.1.1).
Research and training evaluating key population and
Millennium Development Goals and
institutions
social development policies
Socio-economic Development Plan
and strategies, at national and
priorities
International Labour
subnational levels. This
Baseline: three; Target: at least six
Organization;
includes international and
(for example, intercensal population
International
national technical assistance
and housing survey, migration
Organization for
for the National Statistical
survey, demographic and health
Migration;
Development Strategy.
survey and survey of young people)
UNDP; UNICEF;
other United Nations
Indicator: Number of new and
organizations and
revised indicators on population,
development partners
reproductive health and gender,
disaggregated by province,
available for national statistics
indicators system
Baseline: 0; Target: at least three
new indicators and five revised
indicators

(disaggregated by

Indicative
resources (US
dollars)
Regular
resources: $4.63
million
Other resources:
$1.77 million
Total:
$6.4 million

17

One Plan focus area 2: access to quality essential services and social protection
One Plan outcome: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4
Selected One Plan outcome indicators: (a) proportion of deliveries attended by trained health personnel (disaggregated by province and region);
(b) sex ratio at birth (disaggregated by ethnicity, income, education and region); (c) proportion of reported cases of domestic violence that receive
services and support (protection, legal aid, health care or counselling) (disaggregated by sex, ethnicity, rural/urb an, education); and (d) HIV-prevalence
rate among groups at higher risk of HIV infection (men in high -risk groups, male injecting drug users and female sex workers), (national and
disaggregated by provinces where means of verification studies are conducted ) Related UNFPA strategic plan focus areas: (a) reproductive health and
rights; (b) gender equality; and (c) population and development
Agencies of the
UNFPA will build capacity to
Indicator: Number of policy
High-quality evidence is
Regular resources:
Party; committees of
produce evidence on the social
research studies and evaluations on
available for use by decision$17.19 million
the National
protection system for the
social protection systems for the
makers to inform the formulation,
Assembly; Ministries elderly, young migrants and
elderly, young migrants and ethnic
monitoring and evaluation of
Other resources:
of: Culture, Sports
ethnic minorities to influence
minorities used in appropriate
social protection related
$8.51 million
and Tourism; Health; national and subnational
policy forums
legislation and policy (Output
Labour, Invalids and
policies and strategy dialogue.
Baseline: 0; Target: at least two (per 2.1.1).
Total:
Social Affairs;
In the health sector, UNFPA
year) newly conducted policy
Policy advice and technical
$25.7 million
Planning and
will provide support to
research studies discussed in policy
support provided, and considered
Investment;
strengthen the health system,
forums
by the Government to enhance
selected provinces
focusing on a comprehensive
the effectiveness of the social
health management
Indicator: Number of costed policy
protection system, with a
Mass organizations;
information system and on
options identified by Ministry of
particular focus on coherence
National Commission human-resource policies for
Health to increase the quality and
between different pillars and with
for the Elderly;
health personnel dealing with
utilization of comprehensive sexual
other relevant policy frameworks
research, medical and sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive health services
(Output 2.1.2).
health training
issues in ethnic minority
Baseline: 0; Target: at least three
Policy advice and technical
institutions
regions. UNFPA will develop
policy options available
support are provided to
costed policy options based on
strengthen the building blocks of
intervention models to promote Indicator: Number of costed policy
human and animal health
International Labour
universal access to
options available to increase access
systems, including information
Organization;
comprehensive sexual and
of sex workers to sexual and
systems and the generation of
International
reproductive health services.
reproductive health services
evidence, at national and local
Organization for
This includes targeted policy
Baseline: 0; Target: at least three
levels (Output 2.2.1).
Migration;
options for comprehensive
policy options available
National and subnational capacities
UNDP; UNICEF;
condom programming and HIV
enhanced to strengthen evidence,
World Health
prevention among sex workers. Indicator: Number of new and
and improve universal access to and
Organization; other
revised indicators on sexual and
utilization of a quality and genderUnited Nations
Within the context of national
reproductive health, gender-based
sensitive package of nutrition and
organizations;
policy and legal frameworks on violence and HIV available for
sexual, reproductive, adolescent,
World Bank;
gender equality and genderintegration into unified health
maternal, neonatal, and child health
development partners based violence, UNFPA will
management information system
care and services (Output 2.2.4).
provide policy advice and
Baseline: 0; Target: at least three
National HIV legal and policy
capacity support to develop a
new indicators and three revised
frameworks strengthened to guide
minimum, comprehensive
indicators
evidence-informed responses that

18

package of services on genderbased violence that can be
implemented and monitored
through a national
multisectoral coordination
mechanism. UNFPA will
provide policy research
expertise and share SouthSouth experiences to influence
the national health-sector
response to the increasing
imbalance in the sex ratio at
birth and promote the value of
the girl child.

Indicator: A minimum,
comprehensive package of services
to address gender-based violence is
available for national framework on
gender-based violence
Baseline: 0; Target: One minimum,
comprehensive package of services
to address gender-based violence
(including prevention, care,
treatment, protection and support)
Indicator: Number of intervention
models that guide the plan of action
of Ministry of Health in addressing
the imbalance in the sex ratio at
birth
Baseline: 0; Target: at least two
intervention models to address the
imbalance of the sex ratio at birth

effectively address stigma,
discrimination, inequality and
inequity (Output 2.4.1).
Multisectoral coordination
mechanisms strengthened to
ensure full engagement and
participation of key stakeholders
to support a sustainable response
to HIV (Output 2.4.2).
Gender-related legal and policy
frameworks, programmes and
practices strengthened to
effectively address gender
inequality and inequity, gender
discrimination and gender-based
violence (Output 2.4.3).
Multisectoral coordination
mechanisms effectively guide
comprehensive, evidence-based
planning, budgeting, monitoring
and evaluation for a sustainable
response to gender inequality,
inequity, discrimination and
gender-based violence (Output
2.4.4).

One Plan focus area 3: governance and participation
One Plan outcome: 3.1
Selected One Plan outcome indicator: Number of new laws that are accompanied by a written technical analysis on the impact
citizens, particularly vulnerable and disadvantaged groups
Related UNFPA strategic plan focus area: population and development
Agencies of the
UNFPA will support national and
Indicator: Extent to which
Elected bodies benefit
Party;
subnational elected officials to develop relevant research findings have
from enhanced
committees of the
evidence-based, gender-sensitive
been discussed and considered
knowledge generation
National Assembly;
policies and strategies in its areas of
for use by elected officials in
and knowledge
people’s councils in
comparative advantage (sexual and
overseeing the implementation
management to access
selected provinces
reproductive health, gender-based
of laws and strategies on
high-quality research and
violence, sex ratio at birth and
population, sexual and
data to guide their
UNDP; UNICEF;
emerging demographic issues). UNFPA reproductive health, and
legislative duties (Output
United Nations
will build capacity to oversee the
gender-based violence.
3.1.1).
Office on Drugs and
implementation of related laws and
Baseline: limited use of
Crime; UN-Women;
strategies, focusing on vulnerable and
research findings by elected
development partners disadvantaged groups, including
officials; Target: frequent use of
women, adolescents, the elderly, ethnic relevant research findings by
minorities and young migrants.
elected officials

of such laws on

Regular resources:
$0.68 million
Other resources:
$0.32 million
Total:
$1 million
Resources for 2012-16:
Regular: $22.5 million
Other: $10.6 million
Total: $33.1 million

Annex III
Government of Viet Nam - UNICEF programme of cooperation
Summary results matrix, 2012-2016, including the indicative budget
One Plan focus area 1: inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth
One Plan outcome: 1.1
Selected One Plan outcome indicator: child poverty rate
Related UNICEF medium-term strategic plan: focus area 5: policy advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights
Partners

UNICEF contributions

Ministry of Planning and
Investment; Ministry of
Labour, Invalids and Social
Affairs; Committee for
Ethnic Minorities; Office of
the National Assembly and
related committees and
institutes; General Statistics
Office; People’s
Committees of selected
provinces.
Other partners: UNDP;
UNFPA; WHO; World
Bank; research institutes;
mass organizations;
agencies of the Party; and
the media.

UNICEF will support childsensitive planning,
implementation, monitoring,
and evaluation of socioeconomic development
outcomes, plans, programmes
and international obligations.
This includes capacity
development for integrating
child-focused indicators in
national statistical systems and
socio-demographic surveys.
UNICEF will support
integration of the
multidimensional child poverty
approach in poverty reduction
policies and measurement.

Indicators, baselines and targets for
UNICEF contributions
Indicator: Availability of updated
analyses of the situation of children in
Viet Nam.
Baseline: 1 national situation analysis
and 3 provincial situation analyses
available.
Target: 1 updated national, 3 updated
provincial and 5 new provincial
situation analyses available by 2015.
Indicator: Extent to which
multidimensional child poverty is
integrated in national poverty-reduction
measurement.
Baseline: Mostly income/expenditure
measure, used to monitor and target
poverty.
Target: Multidimensional poverty
measure and methodology incorporated
in poverty monitoring and targeting
systems.

One Plan outputs
Strengthened capacities of
data producers, providers
and users for evidencebased socio-economic
development planning and
decision-making. (Output
1.1.1)

Indicative
resources
(US dollars)
Regular:
$1.5 million
Other:
$3.4 million
Total:
$4.9 million

A multidimensional and
human development
approach is adopted in the
poverty reduction
components of socioeconomic development
plans at national and
subnational levels to
effectively address chronic
and emerging forms of
poverty. (Output 1.1.3)

19

One Plan focus area 2: access to quality essential services and social protection
One Plan outcomes: 2.1; 2.2; 2.3; and 2.4
Selected One Plan outcome indicators: (1) proportion of households receiving benefits from social assistance; (2) proportion of children und er age 1
who are immunized against measles; (3) percentage of rural households with access to hygienic latrines; (4) performance of st udents in grade-5
assessments in mathematics and Vietnamese; (5) accepting attitudes towards people living with HIV
Related UNICEF medium-term strategic plan: focus area 1: young child survival and development; focus area 2: basic education and gender
equality; focus area 3: child protection from violence, sexual exploitation and abuse; focus area 4: HIV/AIDS and childr en; and focus area 5: policy
advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights

20

Ministry of Labour,
Invalids and Social Affairs;
Ministry of Health;
Ministry of Education and
Training; People’s
Committees of selected
provinces; Office of the
National Assembly and
related committees and
institutes.
Other partners: UNDP;
ILO; UNFPA; WHO;
UNESCO; World Bank;
Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ);
research institutes; mass
organizations; agencies of
the Party; child rights
organizations; the media;
and international NGOs.

UNICEF will support the
child-sensitive implementation
of the national social
protection strategy, with a
focus on social assistance,
social work and child
protection.
UNICEF will support policy
and capacity development in
the health and education
sectors to enhance the
provision of relevant, equityfocused, and quality services
for children, in particular
ethnic minority children. In
the health sector, this will
include support to stimulate
demand and strengthen
institutional capacity to use
evidence and data, as well as
support to implementation of
integrated primary health care
packages, to reduce disparities
in child health outcomes.
UNICEF will support
behaviour change
communication to improve
health outcomes for children,
in particular in nutrition, water
and sanitation.
UNICEF support will include
piloting and scaling-up of
mother tongue-based bilingual
education.

Indicator: Number of provinces that
roll out a cash transfer for families
with children.
Baseline: 0.
Target: 4.
Indicator: Exclusive breastfeeding
rate (0 to 6 months).
Baseline: 17%.
Target: 50%.
Indicator: Number of studies on
inclusive learner-friendly educational
approaches targeting disadvantaged
learners, including ethnic minorities
conducted and disseminated. .
Baseline: 0.
Target: 5.
Indicator: Availability and degree of
implementation of a comprehensive
advocacy strategy to combat stigma
and discrimination of people living
with HIV and AIDS.
Baseline: No (no strategy available).
Target: Yes (strategy available and
being implemented).

Alternative legal, policy,
targeting and financing
options are available and
considered by the
Government for the
expansion of integrated
and adequate social
assistance, social
insurance and social
welfare and protection
services. (Output 2.1.3)
Policy advice and
technical support
provided, to strengthen the
building blocks of human
and animal health systems,
including information
systems and the
generation of evidence, at
national and local levels.
(Output 2.2.1)
Improved evidence is
available to ensure
education policies are
inclusive, relevant and
learner-friendly, with a
special focus on
vulnerable and
disadvantaged groups.
(Output 2.3.1)
National HIV legal and
policy frameworks
strengthened, to guide
evidence-informed
responses that effectively
address stigma,
discrimination and
inequity. (Output 2.4.1)

Regular:
$10.3 million
Other:
$46.8 million
Total:
$57.1 million

One Plan focus area 3: governance and participation
One Plan outcomes: 3.1; 3.2; and 3.3
Selected One Plan outcome indicators: (1) percentage of new laws that, as bills, were accompanied by a written technical analysis of their impact on
citizens, particularly those in vulnerable and disadvantaged groups; (2) percentage of citizens who say the quality of public social services and public
administration services has improved; (3) percentage of the population from the poorest quintile that has access to public se rvices
Related UNICEF medium-term strategic plan: focus area 3: child protection from violence, sexual exploitation and abuse; focus area 5: policy
advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights
Office of the
National Assembly
and related
committees and
institutes; selected
People’s Councils;
Ministry of
Justice; Ministry
of Planning and
Investment;
selected
departments of
planning and
investment.
Other partners:
UNDP; research
institutes; mass
organizations;
agencies of the
Party; child rights
organizations; and
the media.

UNICEF will support
elected officials’
capacity to oversee the
realization of child
rights, policy
formulation and
implementation, and the
performance of State
agencies in delivering
services to children and
their caregivers.
UNICEF will help the
Government in building
a child-friendly justice
system. In selected
provinces with high
child poverty, UNICEF
will support the
integration of children’s
issues into the
provincial socioeconomic policy cycle
and into the delivery of
essential social services,
with a specific focus on
the most vulnerable
children.

Indicator: Extent to which elected officials have
access to strategic information on the situation of
children to inform their appraisal of draft laws.
Baseline: Limited (elected officials have limited
access to information on the situation of children).
Target: Comprehensive (relevant elected officials are
well informed about the situation of children).
Indicator: Extent to which the rights of children in
contact with the justice system are reflected in key
legislation.
Baseline: The Penal Procedure Code currently
stipulates some special procedures for children in
conflict with the law only.
Target: Child-friendly procedures for all children in
contact with the law reflected in the Penal Procedure
Code and key related legislation.
Indicator: Number of social audits conducted to
support monitoring of provincial socio-economic
development plans. .
Baseline: 0.
Target: 16.

Elected bodies benefit from
enhanced knowledge
generation and knowledge
management to access
high-quality research and
data to guide their
legislative duties. (Output
3.1.1)
Policy, legal and regulatory
framework strengthened, to
better reflect the rights of
the most vulnerable groups
and increase their access to
justice. (Output 3.2.1).

Regular:
$6.25
million
Other:
$11.8 million
Total:
$18.05
million

Government agencies at
the national and
subnational level are able
to apply participatory,
evidence-based and crosssectoral approaches in
planning, implementation
and monitoring of the
public services delivery for
the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged groups.
(Output 3.3.1).
Resources for 2012-2016:
Regular: $18.05 million;
Other: $62 million;
Total: $80.05 million

__________
21

