Yemen
Country programme document
2012-2015

The draft country programme document for Yemen
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.13) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 second regular session (12-15
September 2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2012 first regular session of the
Executive Board on 10 February 2012.

Basic data †
(2009, unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)
U5MR (per 1,000 live births)
Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2003)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, 2002-2003)
Primary school enrolment (% net, male/female, 2008)

12.1
66
43
370 a
79/66

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

73

Use of improved drinking water sources (%, 2008)

62

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%, 2008)

52

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

—

Child labour (%, 5- to 14-year-olds, 2006)

23

Birth registration (% under 5 years, 2006)
(male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)
GNI per capita (US$)

22
22/22, 38/16, 5/50
1 060

One-year-olds immunized against DPT3 (%)

66

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

58

†

a

More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
http://www.childinfo.org/.
210 deaths per 100,000 live births is the adjusted 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal
Mortality Estimation Interagency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank,
together with independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and
misclassification of maternal deaths. For more information, see
www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Yemen presents a complex environment where political, economic and security
challenges determine how successfully and equitably an integrated development and
humanitarian agenda can be implemented. It has the highest poverty rates in the
Middle East, with 45 per cent of Yemenis living on less than $2 a day. 1 One third of
the people are food-insecure. 2 Yemen consistently ranks last in the Global Gender
Gap Index. Gender disparities are deeply rooted in cultural traditions, inhibiting
women from equal access to basic services, job opportunities and civic
participation. Yemen ranks low on the human development index and is unlikely to
meet any of the Millennium Development Goals or to achieve the targets of A World
Fit for Children.
2.
While Yemen has made progress in primary school net enrolment, it remains
insufficient to realize the Millennium Development Goal or Education for All
targets. Despite a declining trend since 1990, rates of maternal, child and under -five
mortality (U5MR) remain high. Neonatal mortality contributes to 80 per cent of
infant mortality. A key underlying cause of child mortalit y arises from widespread
and worsening malnutrition. Around 49 per cent of under-five children are stunted,
__________________
1
2

2

UNDP Yemen, 2010.
World Food Programme Yemen, Comprehensive Food Security Survey, 2010.

and 15 per cent suffer moderate or severe wasting. 3 Childhood killer diseases like
pneumonia and diarrhoea add to the mortality and morbidity.
3.
Malnutrition is implicated in at least half of U5MR. National -level statistics
often mask even greater inequities at the subnational level. The U5MR is 68 per cent
higher among the poorest one-fifth of the population than among the richest;
delivery by a skilled birth attendant is 331 per cent lower among the poorest one
fifth; 4 88 per cent of urban residents have improved sanitation, compared to 30 per
cent in rural areas; rural girls lag in primary school enrolment due to poverty,
insecurity, deteriorated school infrastructure, overcrowding, traditional attitudes
toward girls’ education and a severe lack of quality schooling; women represent
only 25 per cent of teachers, and only 9 per cent in rural areas.
4.
Achievement of basic rights for children and women is further challenged
amid interlinked chronic and acute needs and emergencies. Thousands of children
and women have been displaced in the protracted Sa’ada conflict since 2009,
comprising almost 70 per cent of more than 340,000 internally displaced per sons. 5
Despite the cessation of hostilities, humanitarian space remains limited, and only
10 per cent of internally displaced people have returned home because of a lack of
security and basic services. Yemen continues to receive increasing numbers of
refugees and migrants in the south and northeast fleeing crisis and conflict in the
Horn of Africa, totalling 53,800 assistance-seekers in 2010. 6 This further burdens
already weak basic service delivery. Widespread, severe vulnerabilities are both
consequences of and driving factors for further instability and crisis.
5.
Many of the development and humanitarian challenges in Yemen can be linked
to its deep child protection crisis. The justice and social welfare systems do not
conform to international norms and traditional harmful practices remain widespread,
as noted in the 2009 Universal Periodic Review. Specifically, child marriage and
female genital cutting are common. Genital cutting affects 23 per cent of women
and girls nationally, 7 and over 90 per cent in three coastal governorates. 8 There are
widespread violations of the country’s commitments under the Millennium
Development Goals, Convention on the Rights of the Child and International Labour
Organization Conventions 138 and 182, as well as A World Fit for Children.
6.
Significant further improvement is needed to make the child protection system
more proactive and rights-based, but it is hampered by inadequate knowledge and
skills of professionals such as social workers. The difficulty in addressing these
gaps is compounded by the lack of reliable, disaggregated data, which inhibits
decision-makers’ ability to both target the most vulnerable and track progress on
interventions. It also impedes advocacy efforts on behalf of those suffering the
greatest inequalities and deprivations.
__________________
3
4
5
6
7
8

UNICEF Regional Office for Middle East and North Africa, Health Equity Study, 2009 -2010.
UNICEF, State of the World’s Children, 2010.
UNHCR, 2010.
UNHCR, 2011.
Demographic Health Survey, 2003.
Ministry of Public Health and Population, 2002.
3

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2011
Key results achieved
7.
UNICEF supported the Government of Yemen in developing a national
nutrition strategy to tackle high malnutrition and micronutri ent deficiencies among
under-five children and pregnant women. The strategy forms the basis for scaling up
interventions and integration with food and water security strategies. This builds
upon recent improvements in the reporting mechanism on malnutritio n, which has
resulted in significant increases in the number of children referred by volunteers,
and subsequently higher treatment rates. Further contributing to reductions in child
mortality, as a direct result of UNICEF support, are elimination of measle s and
neonatal tetanus, vitamin A supplementation and polio eradication measures with
routine immunization. Yemen has been certified polio -free by the World Health
Organization.
8.
Enrolment rates for girls in UNICEF-supported child-friendly schools, at
88 per cent, has kept pace with boys’ rates. This is a remarkable achievement
considering that female enrolment nationally is only 73 per cent that of males.
Enrolment has been encouraged by integrating 1,000 female teachers into the civil
service in rural areas of five governorates. Around a third of these teachers, 377,
were trained and financially supported by UNICEF for a period of three years, and
the others by the Japan International Cooperation Agency and the World Bank.
Together with the government policy to abolish school fees, this influx of female
teachers is expected to further accelerate girls’ enrolment and retention. 9
9.
UNICEF investments in juvenile justice reforms are slowly but steadily
achieving results. Advocacy for abolishment of executio ns of children has
contributed to building a broad base of support for systemic reforms.
10. In emergencies, UNICEF contributed to provision of basic services for
affected communities after the 2008 disastrous floods in Hadramawt and throughout
the protracted Sa’ada conflict, particularly in 2009-10. 10 Through its cluster
coordination lead role in water and sanitation, nutrition and education and as co -lead
of the child protection sub-cluster, UNICEF contributed to the treatment of more
than 11,000 under-five children for undernutrition. UNICEF also supported capacity
building, measles and vitamin A campaigns for children, provision of essential
drugs, access to safe drinking water for more than 46,000 internally displaced
people, educational opportunities for 80,000 children in conflict-affected
governorates and promotion of psychosocial well-being for over 280,000 children.
11. UNICEF has strengthened humanitarian action by dedicating resources for
better preparedness, focused gender analysis and sensitivit y. It has also improved
information management systems within clusters where it is the lead agency. These
investments will continue to be required and will be complemented by a concerted
strategy for integrating disaster risk reduction into recovery and de velopment
__________________
9

10

4

Ministry of Education, “Policy Paper on Accelerating Girls’ Education in Yemen: Rethinking
Policies in Teachers’ Recruitment and School Distribution”, 2007.
UNICEF Yemen, “Real-time Evaluation of UNICEF Response to the Sa’ada Conflict in
Northern Yemen”, October 2010.

initiatives. The aim is to ensure that rebuilding efforts contribute to greater
resilience among vulnerable populations.
Lessons learned
12. The 2009 midterm review of the country programme called for acceleration of
implementation, with an emphasis on key results. 11 Given the magnitude of
challenges in Yemen, the impact of UNICEF’s investments has remained limited.
The implementation of too many programmes without sufficient focus has been a
contributing factor to this limited impact. To effec tively influence policies and
programmes and contribute to a better protective environment for children, the
midterm review recommended giving priority to vulnerability analysis within social
policy and advocacy, improving baseline data, conducting mapping interventions
and highlighting gender and other disparities. UNICEF also was advised to improve
preparedness and response to diverse crises through better integration of
humanitarian and development programming. To achieve these important goals,
UNICEF needs to significantly sharpen focus, approach programming holistically
and expand partnerships to ensure sustained impact.
13. UNICEF has invested in national capacity development at all levels. However,
the midterm review highlighted the need to reach out to new partners in civil
society, academia and Parliament, among other stakeholders. To do so requires
developing institutional capacity (not just individual skills) among these potential
partners and translating these investments into stronger systems tha t contribute to
achieving children’s rights.
14. There is an urgent need to accelerate decentralization of multisectoral
interventions, including communication for development, to subnational level.
While the child protection programme has rapidly expanded coverage and is the
most multisectoral, it remains relatively centralized and sector-specific in
management and service delivery. With urgent calls to improve the protective
environment for children and address child rights violations in emergencies, prio rity
must be given to improving monitoring and reporting, delivery of appropriate
services and bolstering of capacities among implementing partners, including
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations
(CBOs) at district and community levels.

The country programme, 2012-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of US$)
Programmes

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

__________________
11

Government of Yemen-UNICEF Programme of Cooperation, Mid-Term Review Report, 20072011, July 2009.
5

(In thousands of US$)
Programmes

Equitable access to basic social services

Regular resources

Other resources

Total

12 876

18 856

31 732

Evidence for children’s rights

4 292

6 284

10 576

Empowerment for children’s rights

8 584

12 572

21 156

Cross-sectoral costs

2 860

4 188

7 048

28 612

41 900

70 512

Total

Based on the experience of recent years, the country office anticipates $20 million per year in
additional emergency funding, for a total of $80 million over the country programme cycle.

Preparation process
15. The preparation of this country programme document has been closely aligned
with the elaboration of the 2012-2015 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF). In addition, the Yemen Development Plan for Poverty
Reduction (DPPR) 2011-2015 and emerging national policies and priorities,
including increased use of evidence within policymaking, have guided UNICEF ’s
planning. The contextual framework of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan,
change management and the organization’s intensified focus on the most
disadvantaged children have been influential. The recommendations of an ongoing
gender review, particularly of the UNICEF-led clusters, have been reflected in the
new country programme. Priority has been given to capacity development of staff
and stakeholders for planning, implementing and monitoring to achieve more
gender-responsive programmes.
16. Intensive brainstorming, including a Strategic Moment of Reflection with
partners, donors, staff and the UNICEF regional office in November 2010, endorsed
the focus on increased equity in access to basic services, strengthening evidence based advocacy and programming, empowerment of rights-holders and duty-bearers,
and expanding partnerships to increase programme coverage and leverage resources.
The draft country programme document and the summary results matrix were
discussed at annual reviews with counterparts in late 2010 and in a plenary meeting
with senior officials of key ministries. These discussions further informed the design
and built consensus around the proposed shift.
Programme and component results and strategies
17. The overall goal of the 2012-2015 programme of cooperation is to achieve
more equitable development for children in Yemen and greater fulfilment of their
rights to protection, participation and development, particularly for the poorest and
most vulnerable. This is to take place in line with the country’s commitments to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its protocols, the Millennium
Development Goals and the Millennium Declaration. To accomplish this goal,
UNICEF will strategically focus on three multisectoral programme components:
(a) equitable access to basic social services, (b) evidence for children’s rights and
(c) empowerment for children’s rights. UNICEF will prioritize programme areas
where it has a clear comparative advantage. Effectiveness will derive from how
UNICEF engages. It will be more selective about where and in which sectors it

6

works and will reallocate resources to support those efforts yielding the greatest
impact.
18. UNICEF will explore opportunities to outsource initiatives and advocate for
partners’ engagement in areas where it does not have a comparative advantage. To
better address inequalities, UNICEF will concentrate direct programming on
reaching the most vulnerable children throughout the country at the district level.
Special attention will be given to emergencies, for which UNICEF will take full
responsibility in its role as lead agency for designated clusters. To ident ify targeted
districts, UNICEF — together with the Government of Yemen and international and
NGO partners — will devise a composite indicator to measure deprivations in
education, health, nutrition and child protection. UNICEF will utilize existing and
new district-level data available through an updated demographic and health survey
in 2011 to identify where specific needs are the greatest, with priority given to
districts affected by emergencies. The number of vulnerable districts will be
determined by assessing their position with respect to a threshold of the composite
indictor, using new survey data as available.
19. Prioritizing attainment of the Millennium Development Goals is paramount.
Targeted, multisectoral and accelerated programming, along with strong advocacy
for proportionate budgetary allocations to benefit children, will provide the impetus
for the evolution of decentralized systems. UNICEF will focus on girls through an
emphasis on data disaggregated by sex, age, region and other factors; additional
gender analysis that identifies specific needs for girls and boys, both in emergencies
and in development programming; upstream policy work to ensure gender
mainstreaming in Government of Yemen plans and policies; and opportunities for
girls and boys to participate in issues affecting their well -being.
20. Expanded partnerships must be at the heart of this new push for equitable
development of Yemeni children. Clear, reliable and strategic partnerships to reach
the most disadvantaged will be built to complement the strategic focus and ensure
effective response. UNICEF will particularly expand innovative alliances with local
NGOs and civil society organizations, the private sector, the media, national
universities, regional centres of excellence and especially children and young people
themselves and their families. All will be instrumental in influencing dialogue as
well as in scaling up community-based strategies and strengthening community
empowerment.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF
21. The 2012-2015 country programme of cooperation is based on the strategic
pillars of the draft fourth DPPR 2011-2015. The programme will support the DPPR
objectives of expanded social protection and significant progress in attaining the
Millennium Development Goals (malnutrition and education in particular), with a
focus on human resources development, balanced local development, a wider social
safety net and expanded partnerships.
22. UNICEF programme component results contribute to the Consolidated Appeal
and UNDAF outcomes on ensuring improved access to quality basic social services,
7

food security and nutrition for vulnerable groups and communities; enha nced
economic and social status, access and capacity to participate in decision -making
and economic activities for youth and women; effective community engagement in
sustainable management of natural resources, risk reduction and enhancement of
human security; increased government accountability at central and local levels,
along with equitable access to justice and human rights; improved national
capacities and mechanisms to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts; and
strengthened national capacities for evidence-based planning, implementation and
monitoring of development programmes. UNICEF will lead a United Nations joint
programme on nutrition/food security and actively engage in United Nations joint
area-based programming.
Relationship to international priorities
23. The five priority areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan are
reflected fully in the programme design and expected results, including themes of
raising service quality and addressing issues of reliable data and effective
governance structures. In its direct delivery, UNICEF will especially invest in focus
area 1 (young child survival and development), addressing all key results, but
especially scaling up nutrition; and in focus areas 2 (education and gender equality),
4 (child protection) and 5 (policy advocacy and partnerships for children’s rights).
UNICEF will integrate emergency preparedness into its regular development
planning to ensure timely response to crises and to support quicker and smoother
transition to stable recovery.
24. The Convention on the Rights of the Child remains the beacon for the country
programme. Particularly through more emphasis on partnerships, the programme
structure strongly supports donor harmonization efforts in conformity with the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action. It has been
guided by the Millennium Declaration, all the Millennium Development Goals, the
declaration and plan of action for A World Fit for Children, and recommendations
from major international conventions, including the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Universal Periodic Review.
Programme components
25. Equitable access to basic social services. The result to be achieved by 2015
is: girls and boys have sustainable and equitable access to and use quality targeted
basic social services, particularly to accelerate progress towards Millennium
Development Goals 1 to 7. Based on UNICEF’s comparative advantages, priority
will be given to multisectoral investments in child survival, education, child
protection and leveraging and partnerships. This component will focus on
strengthening systems at central and decentralized levels, as well as improving
planning and monitoring, capacity development and servic e delivery, including in
emergencies, by community health workers, teachers, social workers and law
enforcement personnel. Such shifts will require strong advocacy, based on the
results of the ‘evidence for children’s rights’ component of the country programme,
to ensure that ministerial budgets reflect the UNICEF and DPPR goals of reaching
the most vulnerable in an evolving, decentralized system. To support this work on
equitable access to basic social services, UNICEF will engage in the national
discussion on social protection to ensure a pro-child focus within existing

8

initiatives, provide technical support to improve targeting and contribute to
monitoring and evaluation of social protection in the country.
26. Framed within implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy and Food
Security Strategy Paper and Action Plan, the child survival sub -component will
focus on ensuring that 40 per cent of severely wasted under-five girls and boys in
the most vulnerable districts use an integrated package of healt h and nutrition
services, including micronutrients. This will be achieved by scaling up health and
nutrition interventions at health facilities and at community level through outreach
and mobile services, complemented by an enhanced integrated information system.
Strong support with a focus on equity will be provided to expanded immunization
services, maternal and neonatal care, integrated management of childhood illnesses,
household water treatment and storage, hygiene and hand -washing with soap.
Regional and subregional child survival emergency plans will be developed and
supplies pre-positioned for timely response. Links with the country’s Social Fund
for Development and Social Welfare Fund as well as the World Bank and other key
partners will be strengthened at regional level.
27. Enrolment of 80 per cent of school-aged girls and 90 per cent of boys in the
country’s most vulnerable districts will be supported through effectively functioning
child-friendly schools, with enhanced completion and transition rates to secondary
education, especially for girls. Priority will be given to girls and boys who have
never enrolled in school, those who drop out before completing the primary cycle
and those who do not transition to secondary school. Advocacy will focus on
ensuring that sufficient female teachers are assigned to rural areas and on
enforcement of the school fee abolition policy. Strong linkages will be established
with UNICEF interventions in water, sanitation and hygiene and child protection,
which will focus on making the school environment free from any form of violence
against children, including in emergencies.
28. The child protection sub-component will contribute to ensuring that 30 per
cent more girls and boys affected by or at risk of violence, abu se and exploitation,
including in emergencies, access effective child social welfare and child justice
services in the country’s most vulnerable districts. The sub-component will also
mainstream child protection services in education and health sectors. Th e birth
registration system will be strengthened, including through piloting recommended
changes in selected districts and eventually scaling up nationwide. Gains made
through this sub-component will be bolstered through complementary work in the
empowerment component to ensure that children not only have access to services
when they need protection, but that duty-bearers are more aware of children’s rights
before protection needs arise. Priority will be given to alignment of key national
legislation (child rights law, penal code, juvenile justice and personal status laws)
with international standards. Child protection networks will be enabled to better
prepare for and respond to emergencies, while children in emergencies will be
accorded access to protection services.
29. The leveraging and partnerships sub-component will focus on deepening
strategic partnerships to facilitate attention to other child -focused programmes,
9

including mother and child health, water, sanitation and hygiene, HIV/AIDS and
social protection. Particular attention will be given to improving immunization and
rural sanitation, including development and implementation of a National Rural
Sanitation Strategy. Investments will be encouraged in areas such as quality
infrastructure and commodities, including procurement of vaccines. Special
emphasis will be placed on enhancing coordination by UNICEF -led clusters for
efficient humanitarian response.
30. Evidence for children’s rights. The result to be achieved by 2015 is: the
evidence base on children in Yemen is complete, updated and effectively used to
identify and implement sustainable, high-impact interventions and policies,
emphasizing the most disadvantaged. Priority will be given to data and systems;
evaluation and knowledge management; child rights reporting; and advocacy and
leveraging for effective use of data. There will be a strong focus on emergencies,
with efforts to pinpoint critical geographical and other disparities, allowing
UNICEF to address specific needs at subnational level and in the most vulnerable
areas. Work will be undertaken to enhance national statistical and evaluation
capacity, particularly through strengthening the Central Statistical Organization at
subnational and local levels; facilitate establishment of linkage s with national
research institutions, the private sector and civil society, among others; and
disseminate best practices from other statistical organizations, focused on South South knowledge sharing.
31. The data and systems sub-component will help ensure that government
information management systems in health, education, nutrition and water,
sanitation and hygiene are strengthened to improve targeting of the most
disadvantaged (including for emergency preparedness and response); delivery of
regular, quality information on children at central and decentralized levels; and
development of new systems in key sectors (child protection, early warning/action,
humanitarian information). Data comprising the composite indicator used to select
UNICEF’s targeted districts will be regularly updated and analysed so that UNICEF
may track vulnerabilities and ensure that programmes are effectively reaching the
country’s most disadvantaged children. Advocacy efforts will focus on encouraging
the use of these data in policymaking.
32. The evaluation and knowledge management sub-component will ensure that
surveys, situation analyses and research systematically collect, compile and analyse
disaggregated information based on selected child rights issues. Close monitoring
and evaluation of children’s outcomes will be emphasized at district level
throughout the country, as will generating and incorporating lessons learned to
improve implementation. Better coordination and improved data collection and
analysis will be encouraged among government and humanitarian actors for
emergency preparedness and vulnerability assessments.
33. The child rights reporting sub-component will help support government and
other stakeholders to provide timely, quality reports on children ’s rights, based on
international instruments to which Yemen is a State Party and other international
obligations. Development of monitoring and reporting mechanisms will be
facilitated. Attention will be given to supporting national development partners to
anticipate, mitigate and respond rapidly to violations of child rights at national and
subnational levels.

10

34. Leveraging for effective use of data will focus on child rights advocacy with
existing and new strategic partners. To build resilience among the most vulnerabl e
children in Yemen and break cycles of poverty, conflict and disaster, UNICEF will
advocate with the Government and development partners for sufficient national and
subnational resources and funding mechanisms to expand child -friendly budgeting
and social protection. This will be based on strategic use of district -level
disaggregated data.
35. Empowerment for children’s rights. The result to be achieved by 2015 is:
rights-holders and selected duty-bearers use expanded capacities and services to
ensure sustained realization of the rights of vulnerable girls and boys. Priority will
be given to (a) rights-holders, focusing on adolescents; (b) selected duty-bearers,
particularly at community level and emphasizing women; and (c) leveraging and
partnerships. Building on recommendations of the current country programme
midterm review, priority will be given to creating an enabling policy environment
and key mechanisms for social participation of adolescents. Communication for
development will be used more effectively.
36. The rights-holders sub-component will address adolescents as social actors
primarily, though not exclusively, through expansion of the peer-to-peer approach in
the most vulnerable districts. Young people also will participate in emergency
planning, response and recovery in these districts. Advocacy for community -based
fundraising initiatives will be emphasized, as will decentralized implementation of
legislation that ensures realization of adolescents’ rights.
37. The duty-bearers sub-component will work to ensure that selected dutybearers — such as religious leaders, community and tribal leaders, parliamentarians,
military personnel, school committees or parent-teacher associations and the
media — are empowered to promote and protect girls’ and boys’ rights and
contribute to selected behaviour change initiatives. Women ’s empowerment will be
emphasized as influential for children’s rights. Selected duty-bearers also will be
provided with the skills to ensure that child rights are integrated into eme rgency
planning, response and recovery.
38. The leveraging and partnerships sub-component will use strategic partnerships,
including with governorate and district councils and the Social Fund for
Development, to ensure sustained behavioural change for the realization of child
rights, particularly for the most disadvantaged. Given the organization ’s positive
experience with local NGOs and CBOs and their ability to retain access in
emergencies even when the United Nations cannot, UNICEF will continue to
identify these groups through mapping exercises. They will gain the capacity to
undertake child-sensitive contingency planning and response in the most vulnerable
districts of Yemen. Private sector partners also will be identified to mobilize and
contribute funds.
39. Cross-sectoral costs will cover staffing, information and communication
technology, security and logistics.

11

Major partnerships
40. As noted above, innovative national and regional partnerships will be
significantly expanded, including with academia, the media, NGOs and CBOs.
Partnerships also will be strengthened with other United Nations agencies, the
World Bank and other international financial institutions, and international donors.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
41. The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation will coordinate the
country programme, with implementation and management carried out by line
ministries and departments. Subnational results will be achieved in cooperation with
governorate and district administrations and relevant ministries. Rolling work plans
for each programme component will be monitored annually, feeding into national
and UNDAF reviews, and will be linked to the monitoring and evaluation
framework of the DPPR 2011-2015. The UNICEF VISION platform will facilitate
results-based planning and monitoring. The UNICEF field presence in Yemen will
be strengthened both inside and outside Sana’a to collaborate more effectively with
governorates and expand interactions at central level.
42. Regular progress reviews, annual reviews and the country programme midterm
review will improve focus and efficiency. UNICEF will actively participate in
UNDAF annual reviews and the UNDAF midterm review, in close consultation with
the Government of Yemen, other United Nations agencies and development partners.

12

