Zimbabwe
Country programme document
2012-2015

The draft country programme document for Zimbabwe
(E/ICEF/2011/P/L.9) was presented to the Executive Board for
discussion and comments at its 2011 annual session (20-23 June
2011).
The document was subsequently revised, and this final
version was approved at the 2011 second regular session of the
Executive Board on 15 September 2011.

Basic data†
(2009 unless otherwise stated)

Child population (millions, under 18 years)

6

U5MR (per 1,000 live births)

90

Underweight (%, moderate and severe, 2009)

12

(%, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

9/13, 16/7
560 a

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births, reported 1997-2005/06)
Primary school attendance (% net, male/female, 2006)

89/61

Survival rate to last primary grade (%, 2006)

79 b

Use of improved drinking water sources (%)

82

Use of improved sanitation facilities (%)

44

Adult HIV prevalence rate (%)

14.3
13 c

Child labour (%, 5-14 years old)
Birth registration (%, under 5 years, 2005-2006)
(%, male/female, urban/rural, poorest/richest)

74
74/74, 83/71, 67/85

GNI per capita (US$)

d

One-year-olds immunized with DPT3 (%)

73

One-year-olds immunized against measles (%)

76

† More comprehensive country data on children and women can be found at
www.childinfo.org/.
a
790 deaths per 100,000 live births is the 2008 estimate developed by the Maternal Mortality
Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, together with
independent technical experts), adjusted for underreporting and misclassification of maternal
deaths. For more information, see www.childinfo.org/maternal_mortality.html.
b
Survey data.
c
Indicates data differ from standard definition.
d
World Bank 2009 estimate range: low income ($995 or less).

Summary of the situation of children and women
1.
Since 2000, the Zimbabwean economy has contracted by more than 50 per
cent. As a result, almost two thirds of the population was living below the poverty
line by 2003. 1 Relative stability has come following signing of the Global Pol itical
Agreement in September 2008 and the advent of the Inclusive Government in early
2009. Recent fiscal policy decisions, such as the introduction of multiple currencies
and cash-based budgeting, have controlled inflation and brought some economic
growth.
2.
In recent years, the decline in major development indicators has become rapid,
measurable and visible. The major focus of United Nations agencies and partners,
therefore, has been on stemming the reversal in key indicators. Major outbreaks of
infectious diseases and declining food security, coupled with deteriorating
infrastructure, have underscored the challenges faced in providing basic social
services and the lack of remaining coping mechanisms for the population, especially
__________________
1

2

Zimbabwe National Institute of Statistics, Poverty Assessment Study Survey, 2003.

the poorest segments. Since early 2009, the Inclusive Government has made major
efforts to stabilize and begin to rebuild the social sectors.
3.
Although net attendance rates for primary school have remained high (above
90 per cent), declining pass rates for grade 7 examinations (39 per cent) demonstrate
deterioration in education quality. Due to declining transition rate to secondary
school, more than 1 million young people of secondary age are out of school and
left with few educational or employment options. Children from the top wealth
quintile are three times more likely to attend secondary school than children from
the bottom quintile, strong evidence of growing disparities in education. Although
there is gender parity at primary level, girls represent only 41 per cent of p upils in
upper secondary. 2 Financial barriers are constraining access for the poorest and most
disadvantaged. In this environment, children with disabilities and other special
needs are at increasing risk of exclusion. 3
4.
Under-five mortality has increased since 1990, the baseline year for the
Millennium Development Goals, from 79 deaths per 1,000 live births to 90 deaths.
Newborn disorders account for almost one third of all under -five deaths, followed
by paediatric HIV, which accounts for a further 20 p er cent. However, the increase
in maternal mortality, to 560 per 100,000 live births, has been even more striking.
The major drivers of increased mortality are HIV, decline in the primary health care
system and imposition of user fees for maternal/child he alth services. The
percentage of deliveries attended by a skilled birth attendant has decreased from
70 per cent to 60 per cent over the past decade, with a disproportionate decline in
the bottom three wealth quintiles. Despite major progress in improving access of
adults to anti-retroviral therapy and increased coverage of prevention of mother -tochild transmission of HIV (PMTCT), treatment coverage for qualifying pregnant
women and children, especially children under 2, is low.
5.
Undernutrition represents a major public health problem. Around 34 per cent
of all children under age 5 are stunted, 2 per cent are wasted and 10 per cent are
underweight. 4 The prevalence of chronic undernutrition has increased since the
mid-1990s, especially in the poorest quintiles. Underlying causes include poor
dietary diversity, low rates of exclusive breastfeeding and diarrhoea and
mal-absorption syndromes due to poor sanitation.
6.
The water and sanitation sector continues to have some of the starkest
disparities. Nationally, 82 per cent of the population has access to safe water and
44 per cent to improved sanitation facilities. Yet more than 60 per cent of rural
water supply infrastructure is in disrepair, and 40 per cent of rural Zimbabweans
practice open defecation. 5 The chances of a Zimbabwean in the richest economic
quintile having access to safe water is two times higher than for those in the poorest
quintile; for improved sanitation, the rich person’s odds are 10 times higher.
__________________
2
3
4
5

“Education at a Glance”, Ministry of Education, Sport, Arts and Culture, 2010.
Evaluation of the National Early Childhood Development Programme, 2006.
National Nutrition Survey, 2010.
Zimbabwe Multiple Indicators Monitoring Survey (MIMS), 2009. MIMS is a customized
version of the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS), adding a number of non -MICS
indicators, such as migration, income/expenditure and provision of water and electricity, in
order to capture the rapidly changing situation in Zimbabwe. However, the data -collection
instruments will remain mostly the same to ensure comparability of data.

3

7.
Although HIV prevalence has steadily declined, from 24.6 per cent in 2003 to
14.3 per cent in 2010, the epidemic has had a devastating impact on development.
Young women are two to three times more likely to contract HIV than young men.
Lower educational status is a risk factor for contracting HIV, as are low rates of
condom use with casual sexual partners, multiple and concurrent sexual
partnerships, age-disparate relationships between young women and men, and low
rates of male circumcision. In addition, Zimbabwe has one of the highest rates o f
orphaning in the world. Twenty five per cent of all children in Zimbabwe have lost
one or both parents, mainly due to HIV and AIDS.
8.
However, vulnerability is not limited to orphans. Data suggest that violence
and abuse are widespread. At least 21 per cent of girls’ first sexual encounters are
forced. The perception that family violence is acceptable is shared by both women
(48 per cent) and men (37 per cent), respectively). 6 Corporal punishment is legally
administered in educational and correctional institutions, and two thirds of children
report experiencing corporal punishment at school. 7 Localized studies suggest that
neglect, sexual abuse and child exploitation are common, and many children report
abuse perpetrated by a caregiver. 8 Irregular migration has also contributed to
increased risks. Despite this vulnerability, children’s access to welfare and justice
services is one of the lowest in the region.

Key results and lessons learned from previous cooperation,
2007-2010
Key results achieved
9.
The effective response of UNICEF and its partners has led to major increases
in donor support as well as strengthened relations with relevant government line
ministries. Major milestones achieved in humanitarian work included respons es to
the cholera epidemic of 2008-2009 and the measles epidemic of 2009-2010; and the
development of effective cluster coordination mechanisms in education, water,
sanitation and hygiene education (WASH) and nutrition. On recovery and transition,
UNICEF has worked with government and donor partners to develop transitional
programming and funding instruments in education, child and social protection, and
water and sanitation. These have supported national scale programming within a
constrained development environment.
10. Major programming achievements include: (a) procurement and distribution of
more than 13 million textbooks and other learning materials to more than
2.7 million primary school children; (b) successful piloting of the child -friendly
school model; (c) providing free basis social services to more than 500,000 orphans
and vulnerable children; (d) supporting more than 4,000 children to participate in
the process of developing a new constitution; (e) supporting 10,000 child survivors
of abuse through the “victims-friendly system”; 9 (f) ensuring access to safe water
__________________
6
7

8
9

4

Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey, 2005-2006.
Research report on “Child Abuse in Schools: A baseline study report for the Learn Without Fear
campaign”, 2009. Data were collected from interviews and focus group discussions with 1,053
children in 31 schools in 5 districts in 3 provinces.
See, for example, the draft report of “My Life Now”, UNICEF/CCORE, 2010.
The victims-friendly system is the child-sensitive justice system that includes specialized police
units, courts, and care and support services.

for over 4 million people through provision of essential water treatment chemicals,
borehole drilling and repairs; (g) engaging over 30,000 young people in HIV
prevention and care activities and more than 50,000 in sports for development;
(h) reaching over 5 million children with measles immunization in 2010, as well as
more than 1 million with routine antigens and vitamin A on biannual child health
days; (i) ensuring availability of 70 per cent of essential medicines in more than
90 per cent of health facilities nationwide; and (j) supplying all district hospitals and
15 midwifery schools with critical supplies and equipment.
11. In the area of policy and leveraging, UNICEF supported the development of
the new health and education investment cases 10 and contributed to the national
child survival strategy and the launch of the Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of
Maternal Mortality in Africa. UNICEF and the World Bank co -led the WASH sector
donor coordination and helped to relaunch the National Action Committee. UNICEF
contributed to the Zimbabwe National HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan (2011 -2015),
adolescent sexual reproductive health strategy and male circumcision policy. Under
social protection, UNICEF supported the development of the Child Protection Fund
for National Action Plan 2 (2011-2015).
12. In the areas of knowledge generation and research, UNICEF and partners
developed innovative monitoring tools to assess the situation, needs and pe rceptions
of orphans and vulnerable children. Secondary analyses were conducted of case data
on child abuse and child irregular migration. Support was given to research on the
causes of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality and to assessing the ro le of
men in PMTCT. Further research was conducted on rates of HIV prevalence among
children of primary-school age.
13. A country status overview of the WASH situation was conducted, along with
an evaluation of the cholera response, national surveys on nutrition in 2009 and
2010, and the Multiple Indicator Monitoring Survey, in 2009. A comprehensive
situation analysis of the status of the rights of women and children was conducted in
2010. UNICEF collaborated with Equinet 11 on developing baseline data on
disparities in Zimbabwe. Finally, with the dual objectives of supporting research and
evaluation and strengthening national capacity, UNICEF partnered with University
of Zimbabwe and the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to
establish the Collaborative Centre for Operational Research and Evaluation
(CCORE).
Lessons learned
14. Institutional flexibility and agility are required to maximize UNICEF
effectiveness during time-sensitive, strategic periods of opportunity. Extending
beyond traditional areas of the comparative programmatic advantage of UNICEF
may call for such flexibility, such as in finding innovative ways to strengthen
national capacity in complex political contexts, and ensuring UNICEF human
resources and financial systems are “fit for purpose” in such environments.

__________________
10

11

In view of the sector-wide approach, an “investment case” is an advocacy tool for mobilization
of resources from the Government, donors and the private sector required for scaling up
progress towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
Equinet is a network that addresses equity in health in southern Africa.

5

15. For example, UNICEF extensive involvement in the complex urban water and
sanitation rehabilitation programme as a provider of last resort has been a key factor
in stemming the cholera epidemic. But it has also challenged the organization to
become more efficient in its contracting mechanisms and in ensu ring availability of
relevant competencies in this specialized area. This complex period in Zimbabwe
has required finding the right balance in supporting programme implementation,
policy formulation, evaluation and research in humanitarian, recovery/transi tion and
development contexts. This has assisted UNICEF in remaining relevant and able to
support national-scale results. The context, however, has challenged UNICEF to
ensure staff capacity in both “upstream” policy areas and “downstream” operational
areas.
16. The economic decline has increased both general vulnerability and disparities.
The next country programme will need to focus on strategies to achieve universal
access to critical social services with equity. This requires pursuing access for all
while reaching the most vulnerable as a first priority.

The country programme, 2012-2015
Summary budget table
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular
resources

Other
resources

Total

Young child survival and development

6 991

115 659

122 650

Basic education and gender equality

1 624

75 869

77 493

Child protection

2 291

64 163

66 454

Water, sanitation and hygiene

1 246

47 904

49 150

Policy advocacy, planning, monitoring and evaluation

4 555

5 703

10 258

Cross-sectoral costs

2 297

11 426

13 723

19 004

320 724

339 728

Programme

Total

A total of $125 million in emergency funds is expected over the four years.

Preparation process
17. The Short Term Emergency Recovery Programme and the draft medium -term
plan of the Inclusive Government provided the national framework of priorities and
programmes. The 2010 status report of the Millennium Development Goals
highlighted key priority areas, and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) country analysis provided the contextual basis. Together,
these documents laid the foundation for the UNDAF, which was developed under
the guidance of a steering committee, co-chaired by the office of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and the Office of the President and Cabinet. A joint
Government/United Nations validation workshop was held in November 2010 to
approve the UNDAF.
18. Two internal retreats in 2010 reviewed the performance of the six midterm
review strategic thrusts of the UNICEF country programme and discussed the need

6

for further refinements. Identification of priority areas was further informed by
findings from the annual reviews and the situation analysis of children and women.
The CPD was developed in consultation with the Government, United Nations
agencies, donors and civil society groups. A government inter -ministerial meeting,
held in February 2011, discussed the draft CPD and affirmed that it reflected the
government’s priorities. The final document incorporates comments received.
Programme and component results and strategies
19. The overall goal of the country programme, in line with the UNDAF, is to
enable the equitable and sustained realization of the rights of every woman and
child in Zimbabwe to survival, development and protection. Each programme
component will contribute to the following results by 2015:
20.

In education:

(a) The quality of basic education is improved nationally, resulting in pass
rates increasing to 65 per cent, with a special focus on the most disadvantaged
districts and communities;
(b) Ninety five per cent of school-age children access primary education (net
enrolment ratio); the secondary school net enrolment ratio will increase from 45 per
cent to 60 per cent; and disaster risk reduction is enhanced though a comprehensive
sector-wide coordination and planning process, ensuring equitable and appropriate
allocation of resources for improvement of attendance to primary and secondary
school;
(c) Comprehensive knowledge on HIV and AIDS for young people (aged 15
to 24 years) both in and out of school has increased from 53 per cent to 70 per cent;
(d) All key education policy and strategic planning documents are developed
and adopted, providing the tools to create an enabling policy, legislative and
budgetary environment to ensure quality education outcomes.
21.

In health:

(a) Eighty per cent of pregnant women and children less than 5 years old
have access to quality maternal newborn and child health services nationally, with a
special focus on the most disadvantaged districts and communities;
(b) Eighty per cent of eligible women, young children and adolescents
access appropriate HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care nationally, with a
special focus on the most disadvantaged districts and communities, by 2015 ;
(c) Stunting reduced from 34 per cent to 25 per cent in children less than
five years of age nationally, by 2015;
(d) Seventy five per cent of households have received community-level care
and support;
(e) All key maternal/child health, adolescent and nutrition policy and
strategy documents are developed and adopted, providing the tools to create an
enabling policy, legislative and budgetary environment for maternal, adolescent and
child survival.
22.

In water and sanitation:

7

(a) Access to and use of safe water has increased from 73 per cent to 85 per
cent, and sanitation is available to 100 per cent of urban areas and 53 per cent of
rural areas nationally, with a special focus on the most disadvantaged districts and
communities;
(b) Seventy per cent of households practise safe hygiene and sanitation and
contribute to enhanced disaster risk reduction;
(c) An enabling policy, legislative and budgetary framework is developed,
adopted and under implementation to ensure provision of equitable water and
sanitation services.
23.

In child and social protection:

(a) Focusing on the most disadvantaged districts and communities, 25,000
children access quality child protection services, including justice and welfare;
(b) Focusing on the most disadvantaged districts and communities and the
poorest and most at-risk families, 55,000 households access social protection
services, including social cash transfers;
(c) An enabling policy, legislative and budgetary environment is in place,
including ratified Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and a standardized case management system for child victims of violence, abuse and
exploitation.
24.

In Strategic Planning and Social Policy:

(a) Knowledge on the situation of women and children has been enhanced,
national information management systems strengthened and impact evaluations
performed, to facilitate child-friendly policy formulation, strategic planning and
budgeting;
(b) All of these areas will be supported by the cross-cutting functions of
communication for advocacy and development; gender - and human rights-based
approaches; child and youth participation; social policy; and disaster risk reduction.
25. Major programme strategies are based on UNICEF core strategies, adjusted to
incorporate findings of the midterm review, situation analysis and CPD preparation
process. The strategies include: (a) continued support to government programme
priorities at national scale in areas of comparative advantage; (b) policy advocacy
focused on assisting the Government and partners in “building back better”;
(c) supporting pro-poor recovery by assisting the Government and partners to view
decisions on budgetary priorities and programme strategies through an equity lens;
(d) strengthening the role of UNICEF as a knowledge leader for women and
children by strengthening monitoring systems and research and evaluation for both
UNICEF and national programmes; (e) developing a more systematic and strategic
approach to building and supporting partnerships for women and children; and
(f) emphasizing the role of UNICEF in institutional and community capacity
development.
Relationship to national priorities and the UNDAF

8

26. The UNDAF outcome areas reflect the national priorities 12 of employment
creation and poverty reduction, human development and social security, good
governance and cross-cutting issues including HIV and gender. The Government has
explicitly called for giving priority to all the Millennium Development Goals. 13 The
country programme priorities aim to contribute to five of the seven UNDAF
outcomes:
(a) Priority 1: Good governance for sustainable development including
access to equitable justice services for children and women;
(b)

Priority 2: Pro-poor sustainable growth and economic development;

(c)

Priority 5: Access to and utilization of quality basic social services for all;

(d)
support;
(e)

Priority 6: Universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
Priority 7: Women’s empowerment, gender equality and equity.

Relationship to international priorities
27. Both the UNDAF and the country programme aim to accelerate progress on
the Millennium Development Goals and the plan of action from A World Fit for
Children. Particular focus will be on the Millennium Development Goal indicators
that are lagging behind most and, where possible, on integrating the program me
across the Millennium Development Goals to ensure synergies are fully utilized.
The programme is guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Africa Charter
on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, African Union Youth Charter and Hyogo
Framework for Action on disaster risk reduction. The programme addresses all five
focus areas of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan and incorporates the
priorities of the UNICEF Regional Leadership Agenda.
Programme components
28. Young child survival and development. Increasing levels of under-five and
neonatal mortality, high HIV prevalence, high levels of chronic malnutrition and
weakened health systems are major challenges in the heath sector. The programme’s
key results will be achieved by:
(a) Increasing use of health services by improving availability and quality of
services; support the scaling-up of community care, through health transition funds,
by strengthening the role and action of village health workers who will be part of
the new health scheme of human resource retention of the Ministry of Health and
Child Welfare.
(b) Focusing on integrated management of childhood illness and
comprehensive and emergency obstetric care, with emphasis on pre-service and
in-service training of health professionals, particularly midwives and village health
workers;
__________________
12

13

Articulated in the Short-Term Emergency Recovery Programme and draft Medium-Term Plan
2011-2015.
In line with the priorities of the Government of Zimbabwe, only three Millennium Development
Goals (1, 3 and 6) were the focus of the UNDAF 2007-2011.

9

(c) Integrating maternal newborn and child health with PMTCT and
paediatric HIV treatment, treatment of severe acute undernutrition and supportive
supervision at all levels;
(d) Increasing use of quality HIV prevention, care and treatment services by
mothers, adolescents and children. It will be promoted through social mobilization,
with emphasis on increasing access to HIV testing and treatment for children and
young people;
(e) Improving
infant
and
young
child
feeding,
micronutrient
supplementation and food fortification, and a national programme addressing
stunting. At community and household level, focus will be on behaviours such as
exclusive breastfeeding, safe sex, management of diarrhoeal disease, promotion of
immunization and hand-washing with soap; (f) Supporting a conducive policy
environment by developing a transitional financing and coordination mechanism to
accelerate progress on the health- and nutrition-related Millennium Development
Goals; a national food and nutrition policy; review of the national Public Health
Act; support to national health accounts; and eventual abolition of user fees for
pregnant women and children under 5.
29. The Health Sector Coordination Group will be the main partnership forum. It
brings together the Ministry of Health and Child Welfare; United Nations agencies,
including the World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP);World Bank; non-governmental
organizations; and donors. Also providing important United Nations partnership
frameworks are the H4+ for maternal and child survival, Inter -agency Task Team
structures for HIV/AIDS and the nutrition security partnership between the World
Food Programme (WFP), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) and UNICEF. UNICEF will also continue to support country-level
programme implementation for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria and the GAVI Alliance.
30. Basic education and gender equality. To address the main problems of
dropout and low grade 7 pass rates, planned interventions will contribute to
improved learning outcomes by increasing availability of quality learning and
teaching materials, qualified and motivated teachers, and adoption of the
child-friendly schools model. A major result of UNICE F interventions in education
will be increased access for the most vulnerable to all levels of basic education,
including early childhood development. This will take place through revitalizing the
school grants programme, piloting a scholarship programme f or girls, “second
chance” programmes for out-of-school young people to return to secondary school
or access technical and vocational training opportunities, expanding programmes for
children with special needs and improving school governance. Ensuring a co nducive
policy, legal and budget environment will entail a strong focus on development and
monitoring of standards; better education management information systems; a
coherent approach to fees, levies and incentives, including assessing the feasibility
of planned abolition of all fees; and ensuring that schools are safe and secure places
for girls and boys.
31. To contribute to reducing the number of new HIV cases, the programme will
work in partnership with UNAIDS and UNFPA to address young people’s risk of
HIV by focusing on the drivers of the HIV epidemic, as outlined in the Zimbabwe

10

National HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan. The emphasis will be on young women
(15-19 years).
32. The Education Coordination Group will be the main partnership forum,
bringing together Ministry of Education, Sport, Arts and Culture; United Nations
agencies (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
[UNESCO] and UNICEF), World Bank, donors, Save the Children Fund Alliance
and other major civil society groups. Other government partners will include
Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education, Ministry of Water Resources
Development and Management, and National Action Committee (NAC).
33. Child protection. The child protection programme will continue to work on
systems strengthening, focusing on increasing the most vulnerable families’ access
to child justice and social services and building back the national social protection
system to emphasize children and HIV. Policy reform will emphasize the
development and implementation of a national plan to revive the social work
profession in line with the audit by the Department of Social Services, 14 drawing on
the Justice for Children sector analysis to develop and implement a medium -term
justice system reform agenda.
34. UNICEF will continue to support existing programmes, such as scaling up the
Victim-Friendly Initiative, implementing a pretrial diversion programme for
children in conflict with the law, increasing the availability of birth registration
services, advocating to articulate children’s and young people’s rights and views in
the constitution, and supporting prevention and monitoring of gender -based
violence.
35. UNICEF will support the revival of the government’s cash transfer scheme,
through the revised National Action Plan, for the poorest households as well as
mechanisms to improve their access to basic social services. Improved outcomes are
expected across health, education, HIV and protection sectors. Special efforts will
be made to measure impacts on gender equality and empowerment. An operational
research component will assess outcomes and contribute to learning on
child-sensitive social protection in the region. Simultaneously, UNICEF will support
development and implementation of a national case management policy. It will
emphasize continuing assistance until children access services and have their needs
met.
36. Strong linkages will be made with ministries involved in implementing the
National Action Plan as well as the Ministries of Finance and of Economic Planning
and Investment Promotion, in addition to WFP, UNDP and the World Bank. The
private sector will likely have strong involvement in the social cash transfer
programme. Other partners will be the Ministries of Women Affairs, Gender and
Community Development; Home Affairs; Justice and Legal Affairs; and
Constitutional and Parliamentary Affairs; plus major civil society groups.
Partnerships with UNDP, International Organization for Migration (IOM), Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), UNFPA, the World
Bank and the International Labour Organization (ILO) will continue in joint
advocacy and programming.
__________________
14

The audit included a comprehensive review of the Department’s capacity to deliver services for
vulnerable children as well as recommendations to strengthen delivery, including through
partnerships with civil society and the Council of Social Work.

11

37. Water, sanitation and hygiene. The weakened urban water and sanitation
systems and low access of rural populations to safe water and sanitation increase
children’s risk of diarrhoea and cholera. Key results expected include greater
availability and access to quality urban water and sanitation facilities and repair and
rehabilitation of the national rural water infrastructure. Community capacity will be
raised by launching a national demand-led total sanitation programme and a rural
water programme focused on community water point management and private sector
implementation. Support to the policy environment will include developing
cost-recovery mechanisms such as pro-poor tariff structures, a revised national
water policy and coordination mechanisms through the NAC.
38. Main partnerships include the sector coordination mechanism and NAC
structures, including the Ministries of Water Resources Development and
Management; Local Government, Transport and Infrastructure Development; Health
and Child Welfare; and Energy and Power; in addition to urban and rural councils
and parastatal organizations such as the Zimbabwe National Water Authority and the
District Development Fund. Other partners will include the World Bank, African
Development Bank, Oxfam, major civil society groups, United Nations agencies
including WHO and UNDP, and key sector donors.
39.

Policy advocacy, planning, monitoring and evaluation.

(a) Loss of human capacity and underinvestment across key ministries has
diminished institutional capacity for strategic planning, social policy and budgeting,
and monitoring and evaluation. As part of UNICEF capacity-building efforts, the
country programme will work to enhance knowledge on the situation of women and
children, strengthen national information management systems and perform impact
evaluations to facilitate child-friendly policy formulation, strategic planning and
budgeting.
(b) In partnership with United Nations agencies and civil society, support
will be provided to the Ministry of Gender to strengthening the capacity of the
national gender machinery to formulate, implement, coordinate and monitor
operationalization of gender-sensitive policies. Support will also be provided to
review and updating of policies and laws, to improve the legal and policy
environment for gender equality and equity. The Gender Marker will be used to
monitor resource allocation for gender mainstreaming.
(c) Children's and young people's participation for programme planning,
review, monitoring, and advocacy will be applied by strengthening existing
programme planning and advocacy platforms, including the children’s parliame nt
and children in the media. The decentralization of the Zimbabwe Youth Council
structures (national, provincial and district) will enable children and young people
to participate in programme planning and advocacy. The Child Protection Fund in
support of the National Action Plan for Orphans and Vulnerable Children will aim at
ensuring that children participate in the design and implementation of critical
activities of cash transfer and access to justice and basic services of child protection
(monitoring and evaluation, case management, social mobilization and others) as a
key principle of the Child Protection Fund.
40. Support will also be given to the Government for the State Party reporting
process, ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Conventio n on the Rights of the
Child and domestication and monitoring of the Convention on the Rights of the

12

Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The CCORE will continue to play a major role in supporting evalua tion and
operational research.
41. Cross-sectoral costs will be used to enhance the following areas: (a) effective
and efficient governance systems, with emphasis on performance monitoring and
risk management; (b) effective and efficient management and ste wardship of
resources, with attention on supply management; and (c) effective and efficient
management of human capacities.
Major partnerships
42. The country programme will be a key component of the broad Government United Nations partnership described in the UNDAF. Through the Joint
Implementation Matrix, overseen by the UNDAF steering committee, joint
programming is foreseen with UNDP (justice for children and youth); WFP and
FAO (food and nutrition); WHO, UNAIDS and UNFPA (maternal and child survival
and HIV); UNESCO (education); ILO (child labour); UNHCR and IOM (protection
and migration); and the World Bank (budgeting for children).
43. Building on lessons learned in the previous country programme, partnership
platforms will be centred around the transitional programming and financing
mechanisms in each major sector. Mechanisms — the Education Transition Fund,
Child Protection Fund, Health Transition Fund and similar less formal initiatives in
water and sanitation — will be led by sectoral line ministries, with participation by
donors, UNICEF and sister agencies, and major civil society groups. The
Inter-Agency Standing Committee humanitarian clusters, which are increasingly
becoming aligned with sector coordination mechanisms, may also continue to
provide a partnership framework.
44. New strategic alliances will be formed with the private sector in water and
sanitation and social protection, and with the philanthropic sector in education and
health. Efforts will be made to engage the newly advanced economies in technical
South-South cooperation.
Monitoring, evaluation and programme management
45. The UNDAF results matrix and monitoring and evaluation plan will provide
the framework for monitoring achievement of UNDAF outcomes, while a four-year,
annually updated Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will guide detailed
monitoring and evaluation of the country programme. The midterm review will be
conducted in early 2014 and the UNDAF evaluation in 2015. Monitoring will take
place through field visits and spot checks through the Harmonized Approach to Cash
Transfers. The evaluation function will be managed semi -independently through the
CCORE, whose dual function is to evaluate UNICEF and partner programmes and
build national capacity in operational research. Major emphasis will be given to
monitoring the impact of UNICEF-supported programmes on disparity reduction.
46. In collaboration with other United Nations agencies, UNICEF will support
capacity-building of ZIMSTATs, the new semi-autonomous government statistics
agency. UNICEF will also support national surveys, including the Demographic and
Health Survey in 2011 and the multiple indicator cluster survey in 2013/14, to
gather baseline data and monitor progress on the Millennium Dev elopment Goals.

13

47. The programme development and monitoring committee co -chaired by the
Ministry of Finance and UNICEF will be reinvigorated to provide guidance and
oversight to the country programme. Annual reviews will be conducted with
Government, donors, civil society organizations and other United Nations agencies.
The UNDAF steering committee will help guide implementation of the Joint
Implementation Matrix. Increasingly, sector reviews will assist in guiding the sector
programme strategies and priorities.
48. Internal management will continue through the country management and
programme management teams. The steering committees of the various sector
funding mechanisms will also provide oversight. Given the changing scale and
complexity of the country programme, key international posts in operations and
programmes will be upgraded and more senior national posts included in the
management structure. Due to the very low ratio of regular resources to other
resources, and the short duration and relative unpredictability of funding, it is
anticipated that a large proportion of regular resources will continue to be needed to
sustain a stable staffing structure during this transition period.

14

